PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24 Message from the Executive Director 03
 Message from the Registrar 04
 Academic calendar 2023-2024 06
 Programs on offer 08
 Academic programs 11
 Deans and Chairpersons 12
 Rules and regulations 13
 Fee structure 17
 Financial assistance program 18
 Facilities at IBA 19
 Student ser vices 22
 Ofﬁce of Student A ffairs 24
 Activities studio 27
 BBA 31
 BS (Accounting and Finance) 36
 MBA 40
 EMBA 45
 MS (Finance) 48
 MS (Islamic Banking and Finance) 50
 MS (Management) 52
 MS (Marketing) 54Table of  Contents02 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
 School of Business Studies (SBS) 29 BS (Economics) 58
 BS (Economics and Mathematics) 61
 BS (Social Sciences and Liberal Arts) 64
 MS (Development Studies) 72
 MS (Economics) 74
 MS (Journalism) 76
 PhD (Economics) 77 School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS) 56
 BS (Computer Science) 81
 BS (Mathematics) 85
 MS (Computer Science) 90
 MS (Data Science) 93
 MS (Mathematics) 96
 PhD (Computer Science) 98
 PhD (Mathematics) 99 School of Mathematics and Computer Science (SMCS) 79
 Calendar of Holidays 102
 Excerpts of the academic calendar 2023-24 103 Student enrollment statistics 101Schools03 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
It gives me immense pleasure and pride to 
welcome you all to Pakistan’s leading 
institution of higher learning, the IBA. I can 
guarantee you, that this is going to be a 
life-changing experience for each one of 
you, one that you will never forget. You are 
the honored new admissions to IBA’s Class 
of 27 and by being admitted, which is 
always a very challenging and competitive 
process, you have already shown your 
capabilities and potential. Congratulations 
on this huge achievement! You should feel 
an immense sense of pride and 
achievement and ought to be prepared for 
what we know will be the best years of your 
life.
The IBA has a stellar history of almost seven 
decades, with high academic standards 
and ethical values, and I hope all of you will 
quickly assimilate these traits which are 
part of our 16,000 plus global alumni 
network. The IBA offers a very high 
standard of learning and education, and I 
am convinced that this process of 
education will beneﬁt each one of you 
immensely. Apart from class learning, the 
IBA also has a large number of student 
societies and numerous and varied 
extracurricular activities which all of you should partake in and beneﬁt from. We 
pride ourselves for the sports and 
recreational facilities we offer.
The IBA journey is challenging and requires 
dedication and commitment on your part 
and is one of high academic standards. 
While you study, do remember that the 
educational experience is also one of fun 
and joy. In this process of acquiring your 
degrees and learning, don’t forget to enjoy 
yourself and experience life’s many gifts. 
The IBA will support you in every way 
possible as you pursue your dreams and 
goals.
Dr. S Akbar Zaidi
Executive DirectorMessage from the
Executive Director04 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Ofﬁce of the Registrar envisions a learning 
experience for students that ascertains 
personal and professional growth during 
their time at the institute. Our team, 
derived from a diverse background of 
expertise in their designated domains, 
works as a catalyzing mechanism to 
facilitate a seamless transition of quality 
education. 
In the recent year, we have successfully 
upscaled and initiated various additions to 
the campus experience; the expansion of 
Boys Hostel has enabled the premises to 
accommodate approximately 469 
students, while the Girls Hostel expansion 
now has added up to approximately. 144 
more spaces for students. 
IBA Sports & Community Engagement 
(SP@CE), with its hub at the Alumni 
Student Center, has been actively 
providing new exposure to the institute. 
We have organized numerous events and 
programs which attracted and engaged 
more than 10,000 extended community 
members through engagements mainly 
aimed at creating a vibrant engagement 
platform at our institute. HEC Sports 
Events, Domestic Sports Participations, Summer Camps, Theater plays, Rubik’s 
Cube Championship, these initiatives 
have enabled the institute to explore new 
horizons and be an active part of the 
community.
Our team will be a vital and strategic part 
of the organization by supporting the 
academic life of our student through 
innovative technologies, collaborative 
engagement, and extraordinary support 
services. The quest for a state-of-the-art 
experience continues as we pace towards 
achieving remarkable milestones in 
digitalization processes.
This package has been designed to 
provide you an insight into the academic 
programs and on-campus activities. We 
are certain that as the IBA Karachi 
evolves with the modern academic 
experience, our assistance will be 
available at your convenience.
We wish you a remarkable academic 
experience in the year ahead. 
Dr. Mohammad Asad Ilyas
RegistrarMessage from the
Registrar
05 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
VISION
To be among 
the best 
learning 
institutions in 
Pakistan.VISION
VALUES
Discipline requires self-regulation and adherence 
to an established code of conduct. Discipline 
facilitates the smooth functioning of the institute 
and is essential for an IBA student.
Discipline
Creativity breeds innovation which is critical for 
an institution to expand its frontiers. IBA students 
are encouraged to generate new ideas to attain 
their goals.
Creativity
Tolerance represents the ability and willingness to 
accept and coexist with other opinions and 
behaviors. Tolerance is an essential characteristic 
of successful individuals and societies.
Tolerance
Integrity suggests the quality of being honest and 
having strong moral principles. Integrity is crucial 
to the reputation of individual students as well as 
that of the IBA.
Integrity
Teamwork requires harmonizing individual effort 
to achieve a common goal. Without teamwork, 
individual efforts can be wasted and institutions 
can suffer.
TeamworkVALUES
MISSION MISSION
To impart quality education in 
numerous educational ﬁelds to 
students selected on merit 
irrespective of ethnicity, gender, 
religion, or ﬁnancial means.
To provide a teaching and learning 
environment that encourages 
critical thinking, ethical conduct 
and effective decision making.
To undertake original research that 
enriches teaching which beneﬁts 
business, government and civil 
society.06 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Academic Calendar 2023-24
LIST OF HOLIDAYSOrientation Gala
Semester begins
Midterm exams
Mid-semester break
Faculty evaluation
Semester ends
Teaching days
Reserve days(+)
Final exams
Results of Final ExaminationsAugust 16 to 19, 2023
August 21, 2023 (Monday)
October 11 to 17
(Wednesday - Tuesday)
October 18 to 24
(Wednesday - Tuesday)
 November 27 to December 09, 2023
December 14, 2023
(Thursday)
85
 December 15 and 16
(Friday & Saturday)
December 18 to 30
(Monday – Saturday)
January 14, 2024FALL SEMESTER 2023
Bhittai Day
 August
30, 2023
(Wednesday)September
28, 2023
(Thursday)November
09, 2023
(Thursday)December
25, 2023
(Monday) December
27, 2023
(Wednesday)Eid-Milad-
un-NabiIqbal DayQuaid Day +
ChristmasBenazir DayLIST OF HOLIDAYSOrientation
Semester begins
Midterm exams
Mid-semester break
Faculty evaluation
Semester ends
Teaching days
Reserve days(+)
Final exams
Results of Final ExaminationsJanuary 14, 2024 (Sunday)
January 15, 2024 (Monday)
March 05 to 11
(Tuesday - Monday)
March 12 to 18
(Tuesday - Monday)
 April 22 to May 04, 2024
May 13, 2024
(Monday)
84
 May 14 and 15
(Tuesday & Wednesday)
May 16 to 27
(Thursday - Monday)
June 11, 2024SPRING SEMESTER 2024
Kashmir
Day
February
05, 2024
(Monday)Pakistan
Day
 March
23, 2024
(Saturday)Holi
March
25, 2024
(Monday)Bhutto
Day
April
04, 2024
(Thursday)Eid ul
Fitr(*)
April 10
to 12, 2024 
(Wednesday-
Friday)Labor
Day
May
01, 2024
(Wednesday)07 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Semester begins
Midterm exams
Faculty evaluation
Semester ends
Teaching days
Reserve days(+)
Final exams
Results of Final ExaminationsJune 12, 2024 (Wednesday)
October 11 to 17
(Wednesday - Tuesday)
July 15 to 27, 2024
July 31, 2024
(Wednesday)
36
 August 01, 2024
(Tuesday)
August 02 and 03, 2024  
(Friday & Saturday)
August 10, 2024SUMMER SEMESTER 2024
LIST OF HOLIDAYS
June 17 to 19, 2024
(Monday - Wednesday)July 16 and 17, 2024
(Tuesday & Wednesday)Eid ul Azha(*) Ashura(*)FALL SEMESTER 2024
Orientation Gala
Semester beginsAugust 15 to 18, 2024
August 19, 2024 (Monday)
Important information / notes:
IBA Karachi reserves the right to change/update the academic 
calendar whenever it deems suitable.
(+) Reserve days will only be used for academic / teaching activities to 
make up for unexpected holidays, no extracurricular activity will be 
held during the reserve days.
(*) The holidays mentioned above are subject to the sighting of the 
moon.Programs on offer
The admissions schedule can be accessed here: https://admissions.iba.edu.pk/admissions_schedule.php
Refer to the next page 4Aptitude test 
exemption**1InformationS. 
No.Bachelor of Business
Administration (BBA)Computer
ScienceBachelor of Science (BS)
Economics and
MathematicsSocial Sciences
and Liberal ArtsEconomicsAccounting
and FinanceMathematics
Higher secondary school
certiﬁcate with a minimum of
65% marks
or
A levels (minimum of 2 ‘B’s and 1 ‘C’) 
in 3 principal subjects
or
American high school diploma 
minimum of 80% or An international 
baccalaureate
(minimum 25/45)
Note: All international
certiﬁcate/degree holders must 
provide an equivalency certiﬁcate 
from IBCC/HEC.
40 courses,
128 credit hours,
responsible citizen initiative (RCI),
corporate internship
Personal effectiveness course (PE)41 courses, 131 
credit
hours, 1 research 
project,
responsible 
citizen
initiative (RCI), 
corporate
internship
Personal 
effectiveness 
course (PE)Personal 
effectiveness 
course (PE)Personal 
effectiveness 
course (PE)Personal 
effectiveness 
course (PE)Personal 
effectiveness 
course (PE)40 courses, 128 credit 
hours, 1 research 
project,
responsible citizen
initiative (RCI), 
corporate internship40 courses, 126 
credit hours, 1
research 
project, 
responsible
citizen initiative 
(RCI), corporate 
internship39 courses, 125
credit hours, 1
culminating
experience/thesis,
responsible citizen
initiative (RCI),
research
internship (8-10
week)40 courses, 126
credit hours,
responsible 
citizen
initiative (RCI),
corporate
internship40 courses, 128 credit 
hours, 1 research project English composition (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs) English composition (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs) English composition (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)Admission 
requirement
2Aptitude test 
component
SAT-I SAT-I and SAT-II (Mathematics) SAT-I 3Aptitude test - 
difﬁculty level
Avg. age: 19 5Student proﬁle
Click here to view the fee structure https://www.iba.edu.pk/fee-structure.php 7 Fees
8 Classes start August 
9 Duration 4 years full time
10Student proﬁle main/city6Graduation 
requirementHigher secondary school certiﬁcate (any group
with 60% marks)
or
A levels (minimum of 1 ‘B’ and 2 ‘C’s) in 3 principal subjects
or
American high school diploma (minimum of 80%)
or
An international baccalaureate (minimum 24/45)
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree holders
must provide an equivalency certiﬁcate from IBCC/HEC.  Higher secondary school certiﬁcate
(Pre-engineering
or
General group with mathematics) with
minimum 60% marks or A levels
(Minimum of 1 ‘B’ and 2 ‘C’s)
in 3 principal subjects including Mathematics
or
American high school diploma minimum of 80%
or
An international baccalaureate (minimum
24/45)
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree
holders must provide an equivalency
certiﬁcate from IBCC/HEC.BS-Mathematics applicants must possess a mathematics
background at the high school level.
Applicants must have completed:
Higher secondary school certiﬁcate (Pre-engineering
or
General group with mathematics) with minimum 60% marks
or
A levels (minimum of 1 ‘B’ and 2 ‘C’s)
in 3 principal subjects including Mathematics
or
American high school diploma minimum of 80%
or
An international baccalaureate (minimum 24/45)
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree holders
must provide an equivalency certiﬁcate from IBCC/HEC. 08 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Criteria for
IBA Aptitude
Test exemptionsBBA & BSAF program – SAT I BSSS & BS ECO program – SAT I BSCS & BS Mathematics Program – SAT I BSEM – SAT I
 A score of 600 (out of 800) in
Mathematics
 A score of 600 (out of 800) in 
Evidence-Based Reading and Writing
 A total of 1270 is required.
 Scores of Essay are not required for the 
purposes of admission, however, may 
preferably be submitted for placement 
in English courses subsequent to 
admission A score of 600 (out of 800) in 
Mathematics
 A score of 600 (out of 800) in 
Evidence-Based Reading and Writing
 Scores of Essay are not required for the 
purposes of admission, however, may 
preferably be submitted for placement 
in English courses subsequent to 
admission A score of 670 (out of 800) in 
Mathematics
 A score of 600 (out of 800) in 
Evidence-Based Reading and Writing
 Scores of Essay are not required for the 
purposes of admission, however, may 
preferably be submitted for placement 
in English courses subsequent to 
admission A score of 640 (out of 800) in 
Mathematics
 A score of 600 (out of 800) in 
Evidence-Based Reading and 
Writing.
 Scores of Essay are not required for 
the purposes of admission, however, 
may preferably be submitted for 
placement in English courses 
subsequent to admission
BBA program – ACT
 A Composite Score of 29 (out of 36)
 An English / Writing Score of 25 (out of 36)BSSS program – ACT
 A Composite Score of 28 (out of 36)
 An English / Writing Score of 25 (out of 36)BSAF, BSCS, BSECO and BSEM program – ACT
 A Composite Score of 28 (out of 36)
 Score of English / Writing is not required for the purposes of admission, however, may 
preferably be submitted for placement in English courses subsequent to admission
Programs on offer09 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Various specializations Morning Evening
Fees
Classes Start
Duration
CampusInformation
7
8
9
10S.
No.
1.5 yearsComputer
ScienceMarketingEconomics
full time full timeMathematics
Journalism Data Science Finance Development StudiesIslamic Banking
and FinanceManagementpart time
August August
city main/city city main mainAugust and January August
2 years 1.5 years
cityAugust
1.5 years
mainAugust
2 years
cityAugust
1.5 years
mainAugust
2 yearsClick here to view the fee structure https://www.iba.edu.pk/fee-structure.php
August and January
2.5 years 2 years 3.5 years
main main main/cityAugustMaster of Science (MS) Executive MBA MBA
A minimum of 16 years of education
(Culminating in BS / BBA / BE
or
equivalent degree) out of which 4 
years should have been spent in an 
HEC recognized university/degree 
awarding institute with 2.5 CGPA on a 
scale of 4.00 or 60% marks in the last 
degree (whichever is applicable). The 
percentage is only considered in case 
CGPA is not available. (Candidates 
with work experience will be 
preferred).
Note: All international 
certiﬁcate/degree
holders must provide an equivalency
certiﬁcate from IBCC/HEC.A minimum of 16 years of qualiﬁcation out of
which 4 years should have been spent in an
HEC recognized university/degree awarding
institution with:
A minimum of 60% aggregate marks (Percentage is 
only considered in case of CGPA is not available)
or
a minimum of 2.50 CGPA on a scale of 4.00
(as applicable)
and
Signiﬁcant managerial experience is mandatory.
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree
holders must provide an equivalency
certiﬁcate from IBCC/HEC.A minimum of 16 years of
education (culminating in BS / 
BBA / BE or equivalent degree) 
out of which 4 years should 
have been spent in an HEC 
recognized university/degree 
awarding institute with 2.5 
CGPA on a scale of 4.00 or 60% 
marks in the last degree 
(whichever is applicable). The 
percentage is only considered in 
case CGPA is not available.
Note: All international 
certiﬁcate/degree holders must 
provide an equivalency 
certiﬁcate from IBCC/HECA minimum of 16 years of 
education (culminating in 
BS/MSc - Mathematics, Physics, 
Computer Science,
Or
Statistics) out of which 4 years 
should have been spent in an 
HEC recognized 
university/degree awarding 
institute with 2.5 CGPA on a 
scale of 4.00
Or
60% marks in the last degree 
(whichever is applicable).
The percentage is only 
considered in case CGPA is not 
available.
Note: All international 
certiﬁcate/degree holders must 
provide an equivalency 
certiﬁcate from IBCC/HEC.A minimum of 16 years of education (culminating in 
BS / BBA / BE or equivalent degree) out of which 4 
years should have been spent in an HEC recognized 
university/degree awarding institute with 2.5 CGPA on 
a scale of 4.00 or 60% marks in the last degree 
(whichever is applicable). The percentage is only 
considered in case CGPA is not available.
All equivalency claims shall be evaluated by the HEC.
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree holders must 
provide an equivalency certiﬁcate from IBCC/HECA minimum of 16 years of education/ equivalent 
degree in any discipline from a local or foreign 
institute recognized by the HEC, with a minimum 
CGPA of 2.5 out of 4.0,
or
50% marks (Percentage is only considered in case 
of CGPA is not available) in their last degree (as 
applicable). All equivalency claims shall be 
evaluated by the HEC. Applicants with prior 
journalism experience are encouraged to applyA minimum of 16 years of education culminating 
in degree (such as Computer Science, Statistics, 
Economics, Mathematics, Accounts & Finance, 
Physics, etc.) and Engineering (Electrical 
Engineering, Electronics Engineering,
etc.) out of which 4 years should have been spent 
in an HEC recognized university/degree awarding 
institute with 2.5 CGPA on a scale of 4.00 or 60% 
marks in the last degree (whichever is applicable).
The percentage is only considered in case CGPA is 
not available.
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree holders 
must provide an equivalency certiﬁcate from 
IBCC/HEC.A minimum of 16 years of education (culminating 
in BS / BBA / BE or equivalent degree) out of 
which 4 years should have been spent in an HEC 
recognized university/degree awarding institute 
with 2.5 CGPA on a scale of 4.00 or 60% marks in 
the last degree (whichever is applicable).
The percentage is only considered in case CGPA is 
not available.
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree holders 
must provide an equivalency certiﬁcate from 
IBCC/HEC.A minimum of 16 years of education (culminating 
in BS / BBA / BE
Or
equivalent degree) out of which 4 years should 
have been spent in an HEC recognized 
university/degree awarding institute with 2.5 
CGPA on a scale of 4.00 or 60% marks in the last 
degree (whichever is applicable).
The percentage is only considered in case CGPA is 
not available.
Candidates with work experience are preferred.
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree holders 
must provide an equivalency certiﬁcate from 
IBCC/HECA minimum of 16 years of education 
(culminating in BS or equivalent degree) 
out of which 4 years should have been 
spent in an HEC recognized 
university/degree awarding institute with 
2.5 CGPA on a scale of 4.00
Or
60% marks in the last degree (whichever is 
applicable). The percentage is only 
considered in case CGPA is not available.
Note: All international certiﬁcate/degree 
holders must provide an equivalency 
certiﬁcate from IBCC/HECAdmission requirement 1
Aptitude test component English composition (MCQs)
 English comprehension (essay writing skills)
 Mathematics (MCQs)- Business English (MCQs)
- Case study
- Applied Mathematics (MCQs) English composition (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)
 Essay writing English 
 composition 
 (MCQs)
 Mathematics 
 (MCQs)
 Subject 
 specialization English 
 composition 
 (MCQs)
 Mathematics 
 (MCQs)
 Subject 
 specialization English composition 
 (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs) English composition 
 (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs) English composition 
 (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)
 Essay writing English composition (MCQs)
 Essay writing
 GK/Current affairs English Composition (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)
 Finance (MCQs) English Composition (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)
 Essay writingFall Semester (for NON-CS stream only)
 English (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)
 
Spring Semester (for CS stream only)
 English (MCQs)
 Mathematics (MCQs)
 Computer Science (MCQs)2
Aptitude test - difﬁculty level GMAT/GRE GMAT/GRE GRE general and GMAT GRE general + specializationTOEFL or IELTS
GRE (int’l) math 
subjective testGRE general and GMAT - GRE general GRE General or GMAT exam GRE general 3
Aptitude test exemptionMinimum 600 score in GMAT/ 160 in
quantitative and 150 in verbal GRE (int’l)Minimum 600 score in GMAT/
160 in quantitative and 150 in verbal GRE (int’l)160 in quantitative and
150 in verbal GRE (int'l)160 in quantitative and 150 in 
verbal GRE (int’l)60 percentile in GRE 
(int’l) Math subjective 
test160 in quantitative and 150 in 
verbal GRE (int’l)
600 score in GMAT-Minimum 600 scores in GMAT / 160 in
Quantitative & 150 in the Verbal 
section of GRE requiredMinimum score of 650 in the
Quantitative GRE General, 160 in
Quantitative section of Revised GRE
General, OR 600 score in GMAT160 in quantitative and 150 in 
verbal GRE (int'l)4
Student proﬁle Avg. age: mid 20sAvg. age: mid 30’s
Avg. work experience: 7 yearsAvg. age: 20s - 30s Avg. age: mid 20s Avg. age: mid 20s - Avg. age: mid 20s 5
Graduation requirement18 courses, 1
project, 60 credit
hours,
duration
24 months,
 (corporate
internship for
non-BBA
background 18 courses, 1
project, 60 credit
hours, duration 42
months24 courses,
72 credit hours,
1 project,
comprehensive exam6 core courses,
4 electives,
30 credit hours,
thesis/project,
6 credit hoursMS without Thesis 9 
courses (27 credit 
hours) and an MS 
Project (3 credit 
hours), or MS with 
Thesis: 8 courses (24 
credit hours), MS 
Thesis-I (3 credit 
hours) and MS 
Thesis-II (3 credit 
hours)42 credit hours,
12 courses and 1 thesis
6 credit hours,
36 credit hours
through courses,
6 credit hours
through thesis6 core courses,
2 electives,
24 credit hours,
thesis 6 credit hoursMS core and elective 
courses: 12 courses, 36 
credit hours, Research 
thesis or Project 
Paper*: 6 credit hours6 core courses 
4 electives 
Thesis/Project12 courses,
39 credit hours,
1 capstone project,
1 internshipMS without Thesis 9 courses (27 credit 
hours) and an MS Project (3 credit 
hours), or MS with Thesis: 8 courses (24 
credit hours), MS Thesis-I (3 credit 
hours) and MS Thesis-II (3 credit hours)7 courses, 3 electives,
(30 credit hours),
Thesis/project
(6 credit hours) 8 courses (30 credit hours) and 1 thesis
(6 credit hours),
OR
6 courses (24 credit hours) and
1 thesis (6 credit hours) for
students exempted from 2 foundation courses
Note: (Interview panel will decide
which students are exempted
from foundation courses.)6part time10 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
 Programs on offer
4Aptitude test
exemption160 in quantitative and 150 in
verbal GRE (int’l)60 percentile in GRE (int’l) 
Math subjective testInformation S. No. Doctor of Philosophy (PhD)
Computer Science Mathematics Economics
1Admission
requirementMS/MPhil/equivalent in relevant subject from HEC
recognized local/foreign university with:
minimum 60% aggregate marks (Percentage is only considered in case CGPA is not available) in the last degree
or
A minimum 3.0 CGPA on a scale of 4.00 in the last degree
where applicable
also have to fulﬁll speciﬁc requirements by
the respective departments
2Aptitude test
component- English composition (MCQs)
- Mathematics (MCQs)
- Subject specialization- English composition (MCQs)
- Mathematics (MCQs)
3Aptitude test -
difﬁculty levelTOEFL or IELTS
GRE general + specializationCS subject testTOEFL or IELTS
GRE Math subjective test
8 Classes start August  August  August and January
9 Duration 4 years
10 Campus main/city6Graduation
requirement11 courses,
1 dissertation,
67 credit hours8 courses,
24 credit hours,
Proposal Defense,
and
Dissertation,
6 credit hours6 courses,
18 credit hours,
comprehensive exam,
synopsis proposal,
dissertation5 Student proﬁle Avg. age: 26
7 Fees Click here to view the fee structure https://www.iba.edu.pk/fee-structure.phpAcademic Programs
School of Business Studies (SBS)
SBS is the largest and ﬂagship School in IBA. The SBS is a leading business 
school in Pakistan with a state-of-the-art campus that follows the best 
international standards and offers faculty and students a unique learning 
and teaching experience. SBS is proactively pursuing AACSB accreditation 
and has already achieved a key milestone in the AACSB journey. SBS faculty 
comprises distinguished experts across a variety of business disciplines and 
hold doctorates from world-renowned universities. The school offers a wide 
range of programs in different management disciplines to train a new 
generation of high-potential executives.
Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) 
Program Coordinator: Dr. Amer Iqbal Awan  
The BBA program is a full-time 128 credit hours program comprising of four years 
of rigorous education which allows the student to have a broad view of the 
business world. Although there are no formally labeled specializations, students 
can opt for any combination of electives from Marketing, Accounting, Finance, 
Supply Chain, Human Resource Management (HRM), Business Analytics and 
Entrepreneurship. To ensure that BBA graduates from the IBA develop an 
awareness of societal and environmental challenges facing the world, students 
have to undergo an internship as a responsible citizen initiative with a non-proﬁt 
organization (NPO). In addition, all BBA students are required to undergo a 
corporate internship to get exposure to the business world. This exposure is 
augmented by a semester long experiential learning project (ELP), which takes 
the form of a consulting project for an organization. This serves as on-the-job 
training in the real business environment.  Executive MBA
Program Director:  Dr. Muhammad Shaﬁque
The Executive MBA program is structured for working professionals from diverse 
backgrounds. The program develops cross-functional competencies for 
participants and further adds depth with a rich experiential exchange. An 
innovative learning experience based on case studies and simulations provides 
participants with an opportunity to leap from managerial to leadership roles. 
Bachelor of Science (BS) Economics
Program Director: Dr. Heman Das Lohano
BS Economics program is designed to give students a solid foundation in 
Economics and prepares the students for entry-level positions in private and 
public sector corporations, development organizations, banks, education and 
research organizations.
Bachelor of Science (BS) Economics and Mathematics
Program Director: Dr. Heman Das Lohano and Dr. Danish Ali
BS Economics and Mathematics program contains fundamental components of 
two ﬁelds of study, Economics, and Mathematics. The program prepares the 
students for entry-level positions in private and public sectors, development 
organizations, banks, insurance companies, investment companies, education 
sector, and research organizations.
Bachelor of Science (BS) Social Sciences and Liberal Arts
Program Coordinator: Dr. Irum Iqbal Hussain
BSSS is an interdisciplinary program that provides students with a 
well-rounded knowledge base in a range of disciplines within social sciences 
and humanities. With a strong intellectual grounding in humanistic inquiry 
and social sciences research, the program fosters analytical reasoning, 
critical thinking, and problem-solving skills and prepares students for 
leadership roles and service to society.Master of Science (MS) Finance
Program Coordinator: Dr. Nauman J. Amin
MS Finance was launched in the fall of 2020 as a specialized postgraduate 
program, designed to provide a solid theoretical foundation, as well as a 
computational skill set for a successful career in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance. This program 
is designed to prepare graduates for challenges in the domestic and global 
ﬁnancial system by imparting comprehensive knowledge of ﬁnance and its 
multidisciplinary aspects. Students gain in-depth knowledge with core courses 
in corporate ﬁnance and investments.
Master of Science (MS) Islamic Banking
Program Director: Dr. Irum Saba
MS IBF is a 42 credit hours program to be completed in a minimum duration of 
1.5 years and a maximum duration of 4 years as approved by the HEC. It is offered 
for fresh graduates from business and other disciplines, experienced practitioners 
as well as Shariah scholars. The program is designed to meet the growing needs 
of the Islamic Finance industry by providing theoretical and applied knowledge 
of Islamic Finance, Islamic Jurisprudence, Banking, and Economics. Graduates of 
the program will have promising career prospects in academia and in the local 
and international Islamic Finance industry. The MS IBF program is offered for 
both full-time and part-time (working) students.
Master of Science (MS) Marketing
Program Coordinator: Dr. Asim Shabir
MS Marketing program aims to drive students on a journey from the basic level to 
the highest conceptual areas and philosophies of marketing. The degree will 
engage the students in a manner that takes a pragmatic and applied approach 
to learning, enabling them to solve business problems realistically and identify 
opportunities and challenges while working in teams.Bachelor of Science (BS) Accounting and Finance
Program Coordinator: Dr. Sharjeel Hasnie
The BSAF program is a full-time 126 credit hours program comprising 4 years of 
rigorous education. The program is designed to provide an exclusive opportunity 
for students to receive a specialization in Accounting and Finance. The graduates 
of this program obtain multiple exemptions from the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Pakistan (ICAP) and the Association of Chartered Certiﬁed 
Accountants (ACCA). Furthermore, the Chartered Institute of Management 
Accountants (CIMA), Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan 
(ICMAP) and Institute of Bankers Pakistan (IBP) also provide exemptions on a 
case-to-case basis to the program graduates.
Master of Business Administration (MBA)
Program Coordinator: Dr. Muhammad Shaﬁque
The MBA program at IBA Karachi is among the pioneering business programs in 
the region. Quality intake, academic rigor, and active industry engagement are 
hallmarks of the MBA program. The alumni include professionals that have not 
only gone on to take top positions in world-class organizations but have also 
established successful businesses.SESS is an amalgamation of two academic departments and two research 
centers. The two academic departments are the Department of Economics, and 
the Department of Social Sciences and Liberal Arts (SSLA), and the two research 
centers include the Center for Business and Economic Research (CBER) and 
Population Research Center (PRC).
The SESS has a faculty comprising seasoned academics, out of which 37 faculty 
members have PhDs. The Economics department’s faculty employs diverse 
teaching and research methods in their scholarly work and is highly specialized in 
the ﬁelds of Development Economics, Applied Economics, Macroeconomics, 
Trade, Industrial Organization, and Labor Economics. The Department of Social 
Sciences and Liberal Arts prepares students in a wide range of academic 
disciplines including Philosophy, History, Literature, Political Science, Urban 
Studies, Media Studies, Anthropology, and Journalism.School of Economics and Social
Sciences (SESS)11 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Development Studies 
Program Director: Dr. Ahmed Azhar
MS Development Studies is a multi and inter-disciplinary program that explores 
critical topics of development theory and practices, viewing development as a 
complex and ongoing historical process. Development Studies also 
encompasses policy debates around the need for accommodating varied local, 
grassroots responses to regional or global processes.
Master of Science (MS) Economics
Program Director: Dr. Wali Ullah
MS Economics program is designed to provide a solid background in theory, 
quantitative methods, and applications appropriate to the needs of economists. 
The program prepares the students for careers in universities, research 
organizations, development organizations, business enterprises, government 
organizations and multinational companies.Bachelor of Science (BS) Computer Science
Program coordinator: Dr. Umair Azfar Khan  
The Bachelor of Science (BS) Computer Science program is a 4-year degree 
program that includes courses in theoretical Computer Science, Technology, 
Social Sciences and Liberal Arts, and other areas. The aim is to educate students 
to become skilled professionals with problem-solving capabilities in Computer 
Science (CS) and allied areas. It also prepares students for research and 
development roles. It comprises of a total of 129 units, which are divided into 
university core, CS core, CS elective, non-specialization core, and 
non-specialization elective with 12, 63, 18, 24, and 12 units respectively. The 
non-specialization courses and electives are from supporting disciplines of 
Mathematics, Physics, and Communication. The program's core courses and 
general electives are from supporting disciplines of Mathematics, Physics, and 
Communication, Accounting, Economics, Finance, Human Resource 
Management, Marketing, Management, and Social Sciences and Liberal Arts. A 
wide range of core and elective courses is engineered to provide the students 
with enough ﬂexibility to choose a professional career path of their interest.
Bachelor of Science (BS) Mathematics
Program Coordinator: Dr. Babar Ahmed Qureshi
Bachelor of Science (BS) Mathematics is a 4-year degree program. This program 
uniquely offers the opportunity of earning concentration in allied areas of 
sciences while adhering to the mathematics core. The ﬂexibility and diversity that 
this scheme offers to students in studying mathematics, aligns with the current 
common structure of the BS-Math programs worldwide while keeping in line 
with HEC guidelines. Regular academic and professional career development 
guidance is available to students to help them cope with the challenges more 
effectively. Master of Science (MS) Computer Science
Program Coordinator: Dr. Tariq Mahmood
The MS Computer Science (MSCS) program offers students with a master's 
degree in CS or allied areas, providing them the opportunity to take their skills to 
the next level with specialized professional and research-oriented training. The 
curriculum design ensures that the graduates can creatively ﬁnd 
technology-based solutions, think critically and analyze systems and emerging 
problems independently. It also prepares students for doctoral studies.
Master of Science (MS) Data Science
Program Coordinator: Dr. Tariq Mahmood
Data Science lies at the intersection of machine learning, statistics, and big data 
analysis. The MS Data Science (MSDS) program prepares students to extract 
valuable insights from data in a state-of-the-art manner. The program is 
designed for students who want to begin or advance their careers in data 
science. It offers a blend of statistical and Bayesian modeling, machine learning, 
deep learning, management of massive data sets, data visualization, software 
engineering, and data ethics.
Master of Science (MS) Mathematics
Program Director: Dr. Danish Ali
MS in Mathematics aims to provide a thorough background in theory, 
quantitative methods, and applications commensurate with international 
standards, offering the opportunity for more specialized training in selected areas 
of pure and applied mathematics.
PhD Computer Science
Program Coordinator: Dr. Imran Rauf
The PhD Computer Science program fully encourages graduate scholars who 
aim to make a signiﬁcant contribution to their ﬁeld through original research. It 
offers specializations including Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Computer Vision, Data 
Science, and Theoretical CS. The program develops the candidates’ professional 
as well as research competencies so that they will gain recognition from national 
and international employers. The scholars are expected to immerse themselves 
in research to comply with a strong and vibrant research culture at the institute.
PhD Mathematics
Program Director: Dr. Danish Ali
PhD in Mathematics aims to polish the individual’s skills of using Mathematics as 
a compact language to describe problems in any area. This enables them to 
theoretically expand the frontiers to create new and formerly unknown avenues 
in this discipline.MS Journalism
Program Director: Dr. 
The Master's program at the Centre for Excellence in Journalism at IBA offers a 
1.5-year program that allows students to immerse themselves in all forms of 
journalism - digital, audio, and video - and acquire hands-on experience in a 
newsroom under the guidance of experienced instructors. With a modern 
syllabus -- which has been adapted to online modules keeping the current global 
situation in mind -- reﬂects new media trends.
PhD Economics
Program Director: Dr. Wali Ullah
PhD Economics program is designed to provide a strong background in theory, 
quantitative methods, and applications appropriate to the needs of economists. 
Students will ﬁnd the program to be intellectually challenging and personally 
rewarding and will be prepared for careers in universities, research organizations, 
and development organizations.The School of Mathematics and Computer Science (SMCS) of IBA is one of the 
fastest growing schools for excellence in teaching and research of computer 
science in Pakistan. The SMCS has a qualiﬁed faculty comprising of experienced 
practitioners and researchers that enrich teaching, provide business 
consultancies, support startups, and prepare students for higher education and 
industry. The school has state-of-the-art facilities focusing on undergraduate and 
graduate education. The research labs for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Web Science, Big 
Data and Telecommunications allow computer science students to delve deep 
into the technological realm. In contrast, the mathematics programs offer a 
thorough background in pure and applied mathematics ranging from 
high-performance computing to commutative algebra.School of Mathematics and
Computer Science (SMCS)12 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Deans and Chairpersons
Deans
ChairpersonsDr. Abdullah Zafar Sheikh
School of Business Studies (SBS)
PhD (Human Resource Management),
University of Nottingham, UK
Dr. Asma Hyder
School of Economics and Social
Sciences (SESS)
PhD (Labor Economist), National
University of Sciences and Technology,
Pakistan & Sussex  University 
(Post-Doc) University of Pennsylvania, USA
Dr. Shakeel Ahmed Khoja
School of Mathematics and Computer
Science (SMCS)
PhD (Computer Science), 
(Post-Doc Fellowship), 
University of Southampton, UK
Accounting and Law
Dr. Sharjeel Hasnie
Computer Science
Dr. Shahid Hussain
Economics
Dr. Muhammad Nasir
Finance 
Dr. Hilal Anwar Butt
Management
Dr. Nyla Aleem Ansari
Mathematical
Sciences
Dr. Hisham Bin Zubair
Social Sciences and
Liberal Arts
Dr. Laila Sohail Farooq
Full-time
Faculty at a
glance  PhD (Foreign)  
PhD (Local) 
Masters (Foreign)
Masters (Local)
Total
Pursuing Higher Education
(Abroad)
Pursuing Higher Education
(Local) 
Total85
17
35
24
21
05161
26PhD
MSProfessor
LecturerAssistant ProfessorAssociate Professor
Teaching Fellow
50%9%28%12%1%
63%37%
Marketing
Dr. Nida Aslam KhanRules and Regulations
DisciplineThe primary goal of rules and regulations is to ensure the quality and 
standard of education as well as to encourage professionalism. Adherence to 
rules and regulations by students is vital for the proper functioning of the 
programs. Some of the core elements of the rules and regulations pertaining 
to the academic conduct at IBA are appended below for guidance and 
compliance by all students:
Please note that no attendance will be transferred from one course to the 
other. Transfer of attendance will only be allowed across sections of the same 
course for the ﬁrst week of the semester. Attendance of classes on the ﬁrst 
and last day of the semester is mandatory for all students.Discipline, punctuality and conformity to schedules and deadlines are basic 
requirements at the IBA and are expected equally from faculty members 
and students. This ensures a strong commitment towards professional 
excellence in all those who come to teach or learn at the IBA.
 Good standing
Students are required to maintain discipline, good conduct and appropriate 
behavior during their studies at the IBA. A student shall be deemed to have 
lost good standing if their conduct and behavior is found objectionable 
from a disciplinary point of view. Consequently, their name shall be dropped 
from the rolls of the Institute.
 Attendance
A distinguishing feature of the IBA is its stringent adherence to the 
academic calendar. Students are required to attend lectures, laboratory 
sessions, seminars and ﬁeldwork speciﬁed for every course in a semester. 
The course instructor takes attendance in each class. If a student 
accumulates more than the permissible absences, they should withdraw 
from that course. Students found tampering with attendance records in 
any way will immediately be expelled from the Institute. The permissible 
number of absences for students will include the participation of the IBA 
students in conferences/seminars/events, sports at the 
national/international level, an exchange program, religious activities 
(pilgrimage, etc.) and add-drop week.
Permissible absences per semester are mentioned in the following table
    
  
     
  
    
    
     Semester type
Spring or Fall time
students75 or 90 minutes5 for full-time students 
7 for part-time students
2 for full-time students 
3 for part-time students
3
3
228
14
12 MBA-Executive
only
21
12150 or 180 minutes
180 minutes
120 minutes
180 minutesSpring or Fall time
students
Spring, Summer, Fall
Summer
WinterDuration of session Total sessions Allowed absences   
BBA 1501 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
18 18 15 16 16 15
18 18 15 15 16 15 15 15
16 19 17 17 16 16 12 18
15 15 16 15 17 16 19 15
15 15 15 15 16 16 19 15
15 15 16 16 16 16 16 18BS (Accounting and
Finance)
BS (Computer Science)
BS (Economics and
Mathematics)
BS (Economics)
BS (Social Sciences and
Liberal Arts)Semester (credit hours)The IBA maintains a strict policy on academic impropriety based on its 
zero-tolerance for such activity. Strict disciplinary action will be taken 
against any student found cheating or using unfair means in 
examinations. He/she may be suspended or expelled from IBA and 
declared ineligible for re-admission. A booklet highlighting IBA’s 
policy on plagiarism is available on the portal for all students to read 
and comply with. Mobile phones, smart watches, and any other 
communication devices are strictly prohibited during examinations. A 
ﬁne of Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 20,000 shall be applied to students who violate 
this rule.Cheating and plagiarism Normal course load for graduate
programs
Students of the MBA Evening Program may seek advance credit for 
not more than two required courses, which they may have 
successfully completed while being students in the certiﬁcate 
program. They are subject to the following conditions:Transfer of credits
The student must have held a Master’s degree with 60% marks at 
the time of admission to the certiﬁcate program 
The ﬁnal grade of the course in the semester should be at least “B”
The course for which the credit is sought was completed within two 
years from the date of admission.
Students are allowed to take one additional course only under the
following conditions:
If a student has a course deﬁciency due to failure in a course, it may be 
overcome by taking one additional course in their 7th or 8th semester. 
There is no minimum CGPA requirement in the aforementioned cases 
and students may enroll in an additional course without obtaining 
special permission from the Dean. All other students are required to 
follow the semester-wise course load given below for their respective 
program including non-credit courses. Students are also encouraged 
to make up their deﬁcient courses during summer semesters.A student cannot take additional course(s) in any semester except in 
the ﬁnal semester to complete course work.
Part-time students of MS programs may take 3 to 9 credits in the spring 
and fall semesters.Additional course policy for 
undergraduate programs
Please note that normal load varies for different semesters and 
different programsNormal course load for undergraduate
programs
Programs 
  Credit  hours 
Programs Spring or Fall semester Summer sem ester Conditions 
MBA (full-time-Morning )    15   
 
(MBA Evening )  
 9  
Executive MBA 9 to 12* 9 to 12* 
 
MS (Mathematics) 12 - *3 credits for removal of 
deficien cy 
MS (Computer Science) 9 -  -
 
MS (full-time–Economics)  12 to 15 - 
 
MS (Islamic Banking and 
Finance) 12 -  - 
MS (Management) 12 -  - 
MS (Data Science) 9 -  - 
PhD (Mathematics) 9 - - 
PhD (Economics) 9 to 12* - *12 credits are maximum 
PhD (Computer Science) 9 to 12 3 - *12 credits if CGPA
is above 3.00
Up to 18 credits if doing
an MS thesisRules and Regulations
Withdrawal from a course 
A student may withdraw from courses if such withdrawal helps the student 
in improving their performance in the remaining courses. Withdrawal from 
a course is not treated as failure and it does not impact the GPA. A “W” 
grade would be indicated on the transcript for a withdrawn course. If a 
student has accumulated more than the permissible absences in any 
course, they must withdraw from that course.
Students are allowed to withdraw from some or all the courses for which 
they have registered in a semester.
Withdrawals from courses can be requested by submission of the course 
withdrawal form (obtainable from Program Ofﬁce or downloadable from 
the IBA portal) to the respective Program Ofﬁce 1 day before the 
commencement of the ﬁnal examinations.
Semester freeze 
A semester freeze (or break) is a semester in which a student is not 
registered for any course due to personal reasons. Any student availing one 
or more semester freeze must complete the degree requirements before 
the stipulated time bar for the program in which they are enrolled. Every 
student who wishes to avail a semester freeze must formally inform the 
Program Ofﬁce about it at least one week before the commencement of the 
semester. If a semester freeze is required during a semester, then the 
application must be submitted to the Program Ofﬁce at least one week 
before the commencement date of ﬁnal exams for that semester. All 
courses are marked as withdrawn when a semester break is applicable if 
such a break was requested during the semester.The Academic Council (AC) may on the recommendation of the concerned 
program director/coordinator and faculty member, consider allowing 
make-up exam. The council’s decision in this regard shall be ﬁnal. A 
make-up exam may be requested for either a midterm or ﬁnal exam of each 
course in a semester. In case a student misses their midterm/ﬁnal exam due 
to the above-mentioned circumstances they may apply for “I” (incomplete) 
with all supporting documents including medical certiﬁcates via the SFS to 
the AC. If the AC is satisﬁed with the genuineness of the claim, then it may 
award an “I” grade for the course. If an exam is missed due to some reason 
other than the abovementioned circumstances, then a deduction of 15% of 
the obtained marks shall be applicable if the case gets approved by the AC. 
However, if the AC is not satisﬁed with the genuineness of the case, then the 
grade applicable with respect to obtained marks shall be awarded by the 
course teacher.Students may request for rechecking of their exam scripts subject to a 
deposit of Rs. 12,000/ - per course, which is refundable if any signiﬁcant 
improvement in grades/marks is found after rechecking. They may request 
rechecking for either midterm or ﬁnal exam per course within 1 month of 
the release of ﬁnal grades of all courses studied in a particular semester.
Make-up examinations 
The following policy is applicable to all academic programs at the IBA. 
Full-time (morning) program students 
Under normal circumstances, no make-up examination shall be allowed for 
missing a midterm or ﬁnal examination. However, if an exam is missed due to 
oversight or some non-emergency but urgent event, a makeup exam may be 
approved with a deduction of 15% of obtained marks. A make-up exam fee of Rs. 
10,000 per course shall also be applicable. 
MBA Evening/Executive MBA/MS program students 
MBA Evening, MS, or Executive MBA program students, who are engaged with 
some emergency ofﬁcial work or sent out of Karachi on ofﬁcial assignments 
(during the exams) by their respective organizations may be allowed to take 
make-up examinations after submitting a request on the Student Facilities 
System (SFS) under the following conditions: 
This facility will only be availed once for either a midterm exam or a ﬁnal exam
of each course in a semester.
The concerned student shall be required to provide the following documents at
least one week before the scheduled exam:
A certiﬁcate/ofﬁcial letter from their organization giving details of their ofﬁcial 
assignment.
Evidence of ofﬁcial travel comprising tickets or other documents as applicable.(i)
(ii)
(a)
(b)
(i)
(ii)The extraordinary or unforeseen circumstances for a make-up exam
are:
All applicants will have to submit a request on the Student Facilities 
System (SFS) and produce veriﬁable documentary evidence to 
substantiate their request within 3 weeks of the midterm exam and 6 
weeks of the ﬁnal exam. Medical documents would require 
authentication by recognized hospitals for acceptance as evidence. 
Hard copies of evidence may be required. Similarly, proof of traveling 
(copies of tickets, passport visa page, and entry/exit endorsement 
pages), and ofﬁcial letter from employers are required for ofﬁcial visit 
cases.Personal illness requiring hospitalization or emergency medical 
care.
Bereavement due to the demise of a parent, spouse, sibling or 
offspring.
Severe illness of a relative (parent, spouse) e.g., their hospitalization 
for surgery or due to critical medical condition.
Out-of-town traveling (ofﬁcial visit) for part-time students as
mentioned above (II a and b).
Participation in an IBA approved event/conference.Extraordinary circumstances for make-up
examination (applicable to all students)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Decision of a make-up exam Rechecking of ﬁnal paper 
Student performance is evaluated through a system of assessments spread 
over the entire period of their studies. Students are assessed through a 
series of short quizzes, class discussions, written assignments, research 
reports, presentations on different topics, and midterm and ﬁnal exams. All 
these assessments contribute to the ﬁnal grade. 60% of the ﬁnal grade is 
based on the semester work including the midterm exam and the 
remaining 40% is on the semester ﬁnal examination. However, the Institute 
reserves the right to modify these weights.
Faculty members have the option of choosing either the absolute or relative 
grading scheme and may also decide the percentage for A, B, and C grades. 
A cumulative grade point average (CGPA) is computed as a weighted 
average of the grade points and credit hours for all the courses taken by the 
student at the end of every semester. Final grades in each course are 
converted to grade points according to the following absolute grading plan:
CGPA = Sum of (credit hours x grade points)/sum of credit hours.
The initial CGPA of MBA Evening and MS program students is calculated based on the ﬁrst 
6 and 3 courses taken by them respectively.
The credits for courses studied from any of the top 100* universities of the world, LUMS, 
KSBL, and the universities with which IBA has a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for 
student exchange, will be included in their CGPA after approval by the Academic Board of 
the IBA. However, the credits for grades earned from universities/institutes other than 
those mentioned above will be decided on a case-to-case basis by the Academic Board (AB) 
and will not be included in the CGPA calculation. This will be applicable to all degree 
programs at IBA.
*Top 100 refers to Times Higher or QS Education Ranking.Grading and evaluation 
Rs. 10,000/- per courseMake-up exam fee
After a formal approval of the make-up exam request the course teacher 
shall set up a make-up exam to be conducted by the examinations 
department.
 
Or 
The concerned student may appear for the missed exam in the following 
semester (when the course is on offer) without attending classes provided 
the attendance of that student was complete. Mode of make-up examGrade Marks GP per unit 
A A 93-100 4 
A- 87-92 3.67 
B B+ 82-86 3.33 
B 77-81 3 
B- 72-76 2.67 
C C+ 68-71 2.33 
C 64-67 2 
C- 60-63 1.67 
F F 0-59 0 
I I Incomplete 
W W Course withdrawn Rules and Regulations
Dean’s Honour List 
The Dean’s Honour List (also called Dean’s list) is an honorary academic list 
of students who are exceptional performers at the IBA. The list is published 
at the end of spring and fall semesters for undergraduate degree programs, 
full-time MBA, and spring, summer and fall for Executive MBA students. It is 
also displayed on the portal and website. There are separate lists for each 
full-time program. All credit courses will be counted.Students are allowed to repeat the course(s) for improvement of grades 
with the following conditions: 
The better grade of the repeated course shall be considered towards 
CGPA calculation and there would be no averaging. 
A student who repeats course(s) would not be eligible for the medal. 
This option will not be available to those students who have graduated or 
have dropped out.
If a student has repeated a core course for a better grade, then he/she is 
required to intimate the examinations department about the course and 
request for the exclusion of poor grades. The transcript processing for 
graduating students shall remain on hold until the provision of this 
information.A student must maintain a minimum CGPA of 2.20 cumulative during 
their stay at the IBA. Any ﬁrst-year (with total credits less than 30) 
undergraduate student with a CGPA of less than 2.00 would be placed 
on probation for 1 semester at the end of which they must improve 
their CGPA to 2.0 or higher otherwise they shall be dropped from the 
rolls of the Institute.
If a student’s CGPA falls between 2.00-2.19 (probation range) in the 
spring/fall semester, they would be issued a warning letter for 
improvement of CGPA. 
At the end of the probation semester, a probationer is required to 
improve their CGPA and bring it up to the required minimum of 2.20. 
However, if the CGPA still remains within the probation range then the 
probation shall continue in the next semesters of studies in which the 
probationer may study until the CGPA improves to a value of 2.20 or 
higher. There would be no warning letter for summer courses.
If a student fails to pass certain courses and yet manages to maintain 
their CGPA equal to or above 2.20, they are allowed to repeat and clear 
the course(s) or substitute(s) (wherever permissible) before the degree is 
awarded to them provided that the enrollment period has not expired.
The CGPA is computed for evaluation at the end of each semester 
including a summer semester that a student might have enrolled in. 
First term undergraduate students must have studied 15 credit hours 
except BSCS for which 17 credit hours must have been studied. MBA & 
Executive MBA degree program students must have studied 18 credits 
while the MS students must have studied 9 credit hours. Withdrawn 
courses are not counted in the CGPA calculation. Withdrawn courses 
are not counted in the CGPA calculation.Minimum GPA requirements for
BBA/BS/MS/MBA/Executive MBA
degree programs 
If the CGPA of a student in the ﬁnal semester is less than 2.20 but above 
2.00, then the student shall be required to repeat one semester of the 
lowest academic standing or certain courses in order to bring their CGPA 
up to 2.20 with the following conditions:
If the student succeeds in improving the CGPA (minimum 2.20), then 
they will be eligible for the award of the degree for the program in which 
they are enrolled, subject to fulﬁllment of coursework and other 
applicable partial degree requirements. Otherwise, such a student shall 
be issued a transcript of credits earned and no degree shall be awarded.
The time period to remove the deﬁciency and to bring CGPA to a 
minimum of 2.20 is one year and it should be within the enrollment period.GPA requirement for an award of
BBA/BS/MS/MBA/Executive MBA degreesImprovement of grades 
A PhD scholar is required to have a CGPA of above 3.0 after completion of 
coursework to be eligible for the comprehensive exam. Anyone with a CGPA 
below 2.5 shall be dropped from the program. A transcript of credit for the 
studied courses may be issued to a dropout student.GPA requirement for an award of
PhD degreeThe summer semester is for the improvement of grades or removal of 
deﬁciencies if any. Students are not allowed to register for an advanced 
credit or additional course and can take a course that they have failed or 
dropped earlier. Students doing summer internships are allowed to remove 
deﬁciency in one course during the summer semester. Students not doing 
an internship, can clear up to two deﬁciencies. Students may withdraw from 
one course during the summer semester. Withdrawal should be sought 
within a week after the announcement of the midterm examination result.Summer semester 
The summer internships for full-time students are closely monitored and 
evaluated. Feedback about the performance of the intern is obtained from 
their supervisor. At the end of the internship, the student submits an 
internship report, certiﬁcates and the evaluation form ﬁlled by the company 
supervisor to the Career Development Centre.
Students who do not submit their internship reports shall not be issued 
transcripts and degrees until submission of the reports.Internship evaluation Criteria For Dean's List 
The following will be the criteria for including a student’s name on the
Dean’s List, which will be ﬁnalized by the Dean’s List committee:
The cumulative grade points average (CGPA) must be greater than or 
equal to 3.5. 
The student must have completed at least 4 (3 or more credit hours) 
courses in a regular semester. Undergraduate students in their last 
semester with 3 or less courses remaining are required to take 4 or more 
courses in order to be eligible for the Dean’s List provided all other criteria 
are met. Executive MBA students must have completed 3 (3 or more 
credit hours) courses in the semester. 
The student must not have been subjected to any disciplinary action 
within the Institute during the semester. (Disciplinary actions will include 
all those actions for which a student can be suspended).
Students who obtain an academic semester average of 90% or more will 
earn the honor of the Dean’s List with distinction.
Award of medals or shields for best student
The top student of each program qualifying the following criteria will be 
awarded the IBA medal. The 2nd and 3rd best students would be awarded 
shields. All awards may not necessarily be given each year and for each 
degree program. The criteria for the award of medals/shields is mentioned 
below:
The student who has the highest CGPA, without any failure, shall be 
eligible, provided the CGPA is 3.5 or higher.
In case of a tie where the CGPA is the same, the student with the higher
average percentage marks shall be eligible for the award of medal.
No award will be made unless there is a candidate of sufﬁcient merit. For 
example, if only one student qualiﬁes according to the abovementioned 
criteria, they will be awarded a medal and there will be no shield.
No distinction shall be made between different batches from different 
admission cycles or campuses i.e., all graduating students of a particular 
program satisfying the above criteria would be considered as a large 
group of candidates for the award of medal/shield described above.Every PhD scholar is required to pass PhD comprehensive exam (maximum 
2 attempts are allowed) after completion of coursework in a maximum of 2 
years. Any PhD student who fails to pass the comprehensive exam within 2 
years shall be dropped from the program. This exam comprises sub-exams 
on different subjects studied during the coursework as described below:Comprehensive examination 
PhD CS: 5-hour exam comprising of 5 papers (set by at least 3 different 
examiners) in a single day.
PhD Mathematics: 4-hour exam comprising of 4 papers in a single day.
PhD Economics: 2 exams of 4-hour duration on 2 separate days. Each 
exam comprises 3 parts with individual examiners but aggregate 
pass/fail results of the exam.Rules and Regulations
Proposal and dissertation defense for
PhD programs 
Every PhD student is expected to pass the dissertation proposal defense 
within one year and a maximum of two years after passing the 
comprehensive exam. The Doctoral Guidance Committee (DGC) may allow 
multiple attempts within the enrollment period. Failing to pass the 
proposal defense within 2 years would result in dropout from the program. 
Candidacy is granted after a successful dissertation proposal defense. A 
PhD candidate is expected to complete and submit the dissertation for 
evaluation within two years of the proposal defense. Two extensions of one 
year each may be given by BASR upon recommendation of the DGC if the 
enrollment period has not expired.
An appeal may be submitted to the BASR via DGC for extensions which shall 
be considered on a case-to-case basis and in compliance with HEC rules. If the 
appeal is rejected, then the candidate shall be dropped from the program.
Enrollment 
Enrollment is a formal registration of students admitted to academic 
programs at the IBA. Students who have accepted the offer of admission for 
joining any academic program at the IBA are required to submit the 
enrollment form along with the following documents within 6 weeks 
starting from the semester’s commencement date: 
Note: Documents must be attested by a class one ofﬁcer of the government 
of Pakistan.
Students with O’Levels or similar certiﬁcates that do not contain their 
father’s name are required to submit documentary evidence of their 
father’s name spelling in the form of CNIC, FRC, or passport.
Misrepresentation of any information may lead to disciplinary action.Equivalency certiﬁcates are required in the following two cases: Photocopy of secondary school certiﬁcate/O'Levels certiﬁcate
Attested photocopy of Higher Secondary School certiﬁcate/A'Levels 
certiﬁcate
Attested photocopy of Bachelor's degree (if applicable)
Attested photocopy of Master's degree (if applicable)
Attested photocopy of CNIC or birth certiﬁcate
Attested photocopy of equivalence certiﬁcate in case of foreign 
certiﬁcates/degrees
Two recent passport size photographs duly attested by the concerned
program ofﬁce 
If the student holds a foreign degree, then they must get an equivalency
certiﬁcate from the HEC 
If the student holds a GCE O'Levels/A'Levels or international 
baccalaureate certiﬁcate from a foreign country, then they must get an 
equivalency certiﬁcate from the IBCC
Students can get an ofﬁcial transcript of credit with their grades from 
the  Institute within 30 working days. Urgently required transcripts 
can be obtained within 7 working days on payment of an additional 
Rs. 2,500/-. The issuance of transcripts is subject to clearance from 
Finance, CDC, hostel, library and laboratory (in the case of CS students). MS/PhD students are also  required to submit a copy of their research 
survey/project/thesis to the library and obtain clearance from the library. 
All graduating students must verify their particulars like name and 
father's name spellings, CNIC, and DOB on the ERP before requesting a 
transcript or degree. A revision note shall be mentioned on any 
transcripts or degree issued if any particular is changed after the 
generation of the document and revision charges will also be applicable. 
Provisional and ofﬁcial copies of the original transcript of credit may also 
be requested for admission to universities upon payment of Rs. 2,500/-.
The transcript shall be issued only to the student in person or to a person 
(preferably a blood relative) duly authorized by the student if the student 
is out of the city. Students may generate an unofﬁcial electronic copy of 
the transcript on their own from the ERP system.
Requests for different kinds of transcripts should be submitted online via 
the following link to the examinations department which prepares, issues
and veriﬁes them. https://webapps.iba.edu.pk/tnd/.
The enrollment and admission of a student whose 
certiﬁcates/degrees are found to be fake would be cancelled. Such 
students may also be permanently debarred from the IBA.Cancellation of enrollment Transcript of credit As per HEC guidelines, in order to graduate, students at the IBA have to 
complete the following requirements:
(a)  4, 2 and 1.5 years of studies for undergraduate, MBA / Executive MBA and 
MS programs respectively. The PhD rules are separate from these and are 
mentioned under their respective programs.
(b) the required course load and credit hours for an undergraduate degree. 
This is applicable to all undergraduate programs and students of all 
categories (fresh/internal transfer/transfer through retake).
(c) the required internships and 
(d) submission of project/research survey reports or thesis. The degree is 
issued within 15 working days from the date of application. An additional fee 
of Rs. 6,000/- is applicable for duplicate/urgent degrees (obtainable in 7 
working days).
The degree shall be issued only to the student in person or to a person 
(preferably a blood relative) duly authorized by the student if the student is 
out of the city.
Degree fee for PhD Programs is Rs 10,000/-. 
Request for degrees should be submitted online via following link to 
examinations department which prepares, issues and veriﬁes them. 
https://webapps.iba.edu.pk/tnd/Degree certiﬁcate 
For information regarding the veriﬁcation and attestation of
transcripts/degrees, visit: https://examinations.iba.edu.pk/.Migration or Character Certiﬁcate / 
Veriﬁcation and Attestation of
transcripts/degreesEvery student admitted to some program at the IBA must complete 
the academic requirements of that program in the stipulated time 
called enrollment period to be eligible for the award of a 
diploma/degree for the program. The enrollment periods are given 
below for reference:
An extension of enrollment may be requested from the Academic 
Board (AB). The AB would consider the request on a case-to-case basis 
and may grant an extension of 1 to 2 semesters. If the appeal is rejected 
by the AB, then the student shall be eligible for a transcript of credit 
for the coursework only. His/her name shall be dropped from the rolls 
of the IBA. Any student with an expiring enrollment period should 
approach the respective program director and submit a formal 
application with strong justiﬁcation for an extension in enrollment.
For coursework, the period shall be counted from the date of 
admission.
*In case an MBA (evening) student opts to do PGD only, then 3.5 years’ 
time limit will apply, otherwise the student may continue and 
complete their MBA (Evening) in 7 years.Time-bar rule Academic documents issued by the IBA shall have the name in full 
form as mentioned in the matriculation certiﬁcate/O' Levels certiﬁcate 
or the equivalency certiﬁcate from IBCC that signiﬁes the ﬁrst 
education certiﬁcate/degree they hold. However, if a student wants 
their name changed in the IBA documents then they must ﬁrst get 
their credentials changed on their ﬁrst educational documents. 
Alternatively, they may get a certiﬁcate from the IBCC.
All academic credentials must have the same nomenclature and 
identiﬁcation credentials may have a slightly different nomenclature. 
However, it is advisable to have the same nomenclature on all 
documents.
visit: https://examinations.iba.edu.pk/ .Change of particulars (change of name)
on IBA documents
Program Enrollment period 
Undergraduate Programs 
BBA/BSCS/BSAF/BSEM/BSECO/ BSSSLA 7 years  
MBA Morning 4 years  
MBA Evening/ Executive MBA  6 years  
All MS Programs 4 years  
PhD 8 years  
PGD* 3.5 ye ars  
In case a transcript/degree has been lost, a duplicate transcript/degree can 
be requested by submitting a formal application to the examinations 
department along with:
A revision note shall be mentioned on each duplicate document indicating 
the details and invalidation of the lost document.An  afﬁdavit on a stamp paper of Rs. 100/- duly attested by a ﬁrst-class
magistrate 
Original clipping from any newspaper announcing the loss of the 
transcript/degree 
FIR of lost transcript/degree 
Copy of transcript in case of a duplicate degree  
Copy of CNICDuplicate transcript/degree17 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24Fee structure
Spring 2024 (Fall 2023 intake)
Host el fee (per sem ester)
Room t ype Amount in P KR
Single oc cupancy - with out A C 96,000
92,400
87,000
105,600
102,000
99,000
99,00087,000Double oc cupancy - with out A C
Triple oc cupancy - with out A C
More than 3 oc cupancies
 - with out A C
AC room - Double oc cupancyAC room - Single occupancy
AC room - T riple oc cupancy
AC room - Mor e than 3 oc cupancies
Note: - Utility charges for an AC room will be applied separately on actual basis.Undergraduat e Progr ams
Particular sBBA & BS P rograms
Amount in P KR
Tuition fee (per credit hour)
(Fall-23 Intake) 24,200
Student activity charges 6,000
MBA Progr ams
Tuition f ee (per cr edit h our) 
(Fall-23 Intak e) 26,6 00 26,6 00 26,600
Student a ctivity charges 6,000 - -Particular s Morning Evening Executive
Transpor t fee (per sem ester)Admission c harges (all students) 100,000
35,000
Particular s Amount in P KR
40,000 (0 - 20 k m)
Char ges
60,000 (2 1km – on wards)MS Progr ams
Particular s Full-time Programs
Course fee(s) will be applicable on credit hour basisPart-time Programs
Tuition f ee (per credit hour)
(Fall-23 Intak e)26,600 26,600
Student activity charges 6,000 -Financial assistance program
PKR 2.52 billiongranted between
2008-2023Around 300 students beneﬁtted from
Qarz-e-Hasna facility
Around 600 students  beneﬁtted from
installment plan 39% students received ﬁnancial 
assistance in the academic year 
2022-2023
Financial Assistance Packages
The Financial Assistance Packages include the following:
a. Fee Installments
Full-time students enrolled in undergraduate and graduate morning programs, who 
are facing short-term ﬁnancing constraints, and are unable to pay the entire 
semester fee at the beginning of the semester can apply for the fee installment plan.
b. Need-based ﬁnancial assistance
The IBA Financial Aid (FA) Program covers a wide range of need-based ﬁnancial 
assistance in the form of scholarships. These need-based scholarships are funded 
through Zakat and the valuable support of public and private sector donors. Upon 
submission of the need-based scholarship form by the student, the IBA facilitates by 
providing 'bridge ﬁnancing' till the applicants are successfully connected with the 
public or private sector scholarship donor and Zakat funds. The level of bridge 
ﬁnancing is determined by the ﬁnancial need of the student which is assessed 
through the information provided in the ﬁnancial aid application form as submitted 
by the student. This bridge ﬁnancing may range in between 25% and 100% of the 
applicable tuition fee and is decided by IBA Financial Assistance Committee (FAC).In case a student does not pay his/her total fee within a particular semester then the 
Finance department shall send an intimation to the student to pay the outstanding dues.
The Director Financial Assistance may call the student and the parents (if necessary) 
to evaluate the ﬁnancial situation and reach an amicable solution for the fee 
recovery. The student may also be directed to avail other options in the Financial 
Assistance Packages.
If no other options are available and the circumstances necessitate, the Director 
Financial Assistance may defer the fee payment to a certain date.
If a student is unable to pay the fee in full, then as a ﬁrst step, the student would have 
to submit an afﬁdavit on Rs.100 stamp paper for settlement by the deferred date.
The fee balance should be cleared within the same semester period before the 
commencement of the ﬁnal exam. If the student fails to clear his outstanding fee, 
the Finance department may stop him/her from appearing in the ﬁnal examination 
for that semester.Installment for the semester fee
Deferment of feeThe students can be allowed to pay the fee in two or a maximum of three 
installments and these installments must be paid within the same semester 
period.
The fee installment plan can be availed for the active semester fee only. 
Installment of fee arrears or defaults is not permissible under this option.
Fee installment will be allowed after need assessment (i.e. subject to approval).Note: The IBA reserves the right to verify all information provided by the 
candidates. The FA Committee may also conduct personal visits during 
the veriﬁcation process and may call students/parents for veriﬁcation of 
documentation and to provide Income and expenses details.
It is mandatory for all ﬁnancial assistance awardees to apply for 
externally funded scholarships proposed by the IBA Financial 
Assistance ofﬁce. Failure to do so will result in the discontinuation of 
bridge ﬁnancing by IBA. The student may also be required to fulﬁll the 
assessment process of a donor.Eligibility
For undergraduate students - only full-time students enrolled in morning 
programs, who are facing constraints, and cannot manage to pay fees through 
ﬁnancial assistance options of fee installments and Qarz-e-Hasna, may apply for 
need-based scholarships.
Applicants can apply for ﬁnancial assistance to cover their tuition fee for Fall and 
Spring semesters.
Financial assistance will be provided on a course basis up to the 8th semester of the 
undergraduate program.
Financial assistance will be provided for graduate students up to the duration of 
the course mentioned in the Program announcement except for the Executive 
MBA (EMBA).
Graduate students must take a full load of courses and should not freeze any 
semester throughout their graduate studies.
The repetition of courses for grade improvement or otherwise and previously 
withdrawn courses are not covered under need-based scholarships.The IBA invites talented and meritorious students from any social background, across 
Pakistan to enroll and study at the Institute. At the IBA, we believe that ﬁnancial limitations 
should not be a hindrance in accessing quality education.
Submission of application
All applications are to be submitted within speciﬁed dates. 
Applicants are mandatory to submit all family members’ CNIC who are 
above 18 years of age.
Scanned copies of the required documents are to be sent with the 
application form.
Applications with incomplete documents will not be processed.
For new admissions, bridge ﬁnancing is available at the time of 
admission only.
Ongoing students are required to apply at the start of each academic 
year (upon enrollment) for reassessment for continued ﬁnancing.
It is important to note that only those FA applications will be considered 
for bridge ﬁnancing or scholarship which are submitted within the 
stipulated period.
A checklist for required supporting documents is made available in the 
prescribed application form.
The applicants are advised to consult their parents or guardians before 
submission of the application form along with supporting documents.
 Assessment process
The submitted application forms and supporting documents are scrutinized by the 
Financial Assistance (FA) Committee, comprising senior faculty and staff members..
The applicants may be required to appear for an interview if the FA committee 
deems it necessary.
The Committee then ascertains the need level of the applicants against the laid 
down criteria.
Scholarship awards are based on the available funds.Fee installments can be applied for here: https://www.iba.edu.pk/installments.The following terms and conditions apply to applicants of the Financial 
Assistance Program:
Any student who directly approaches an IBA donor will face disciplinary action.
The Financial Assistance Committee may also conduct personal visits 
during the veriﬁcation process.
The applicants may be required to appear for an interview if the Financial 
Assistance Committee deems it necessary.
The Financial Assistance Committee may also call students/parents for 
veriﬁcation of documentation and Income and expenses details.
If students fail to submit need-based scholarship forms (either fresh or 
renewal) within the stipulated dates, it will result in the cancellation of 
ﬁnancial assistance.
The IBA will provide 'bridge ﬁnancing' till the applicants are successfully 
connected with the external donor (Government or private or Zakat). The 
applicants are required to keep applying for the externally funded 
scholarship (which is arranged by the IBA) till they are successfully parked 
with a donor. Such students are also advised to keep checking IBA Financial 
Assistance page as well as their registered email accounts to be aware of 
available donor-funded scholarships and should apply for the same. In case 
the applicant fails to apply for an externally funded scholarship, the Financial 
Assistance Committee will discontinue 'bridge ﬁnancing' for that student.
The IBA reserves the right to verify all information provided by the 
candidates.
In case of providing false information:
The need-based ﬁnancial assistance award will be revoked and the 
applicant will also be disqualiﬁed from applying for any loan / ﬁnancial 
assistance in future.
The student will have to refund all ﬁnancial assistance payments received to 
date and / or bear the penalty equal to the total ﬁnancial assistance amount 
on an immediate basis.
Misrepresentation or concealment of facts may lead to the termination of 
admission from the Program.
Students can send their ﬁnancial assistance queries at
ﬁnancial-aid@iba.edu.pk .19 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Facilities at IBA
Main Campus
The IBA Main Campus is spread over 50 acres of land for educational facilities, a 
residential complex, and boys and girls hostels. It is located within the premises of the 
University of Karachi and comprises around 40 classrooms, 8 seminar rooms, 5 
computer labs, and 14 breakout rooms. These are in three academic buildings: Adamjee 
Academic Center, Abdul Razzak Tabba Building and Aman Center for Entrepreneurial 
Development. All instructional spaces are fully equipped with the latest audio-visual 
and video conferencing facilities to boost the overall learning experience. 
Other facilities at the Main Campus include:
 Gani & Tayab Auditorium (seating capacity of 300)
 Mian Abdullah Library
 Alumni Students’ Center
 Khawar Butt Gymnasium for males and females
 Pepsi & Adamjee cafeterias
 TPL Event Hall
 UBL Sports Complex
 Amphitheater (seating capacity of 450)Facilities and infrastructure
Sports facilities
Department of Sports and Community Engagement provides a wide range of indoor 
and outdoor sports facilities and professional coaching to keep the students ﬁt and 
healthy so that they can perform well at the zonal, national, and international platforms.
Key features of the UBL Sports Complex include:
 Cricket ground
 Football ground with a jogging track
 Tennis courts
 Basketball court
 Volleyball, throwball, netball and handball courts
Indoor sports facilities include:
 Table tennis
 Badminton court
 Snooker, foosball, carrom, chess and ludoLabs Details
 NBP Building: 1 hardware lab 
 Aman CED Building: 3 computer labs, 1 ﬁnance lab, and 1 neuro lab 
 Abdul Razzak Tabba Building: 1 computer lab, 1 BDA lab, 1 web science lab, 1 TRL lab, 
 1 robotic Lab, 1 game lab 
 Adamjee Academic Center: 1 economy growth & forecasting lab 
 Fauji Foundation Building: 1 physiology lab 
Breakout Rooms
 Abdul Razzak Tabba Building: 2
 Adamjee Academic Center: 8 
 Society Ofﬁces in ASC: 4
City Campus
The IBA City Campus is situated at Kayani Shaheed Road, Garden Road, and spreads 
over 3.5 acres. It consists of:
 Aman Tower
 Towﬁq H. Chinoy Administration Building
 Faysal Bank Academic Block 
 Habib Bank Academic Building 
 Library at Aman Tower 
 JS Auditorium (seating capacity of 400)
 Gymnasium for males and females (situated in HBL Academic Block)
 Cafeteria Aman Tower, 5th ﬂoor
 Pepsi cafeteria (ground ﬂoor parking area)
Existing facilities include 16 classrooms, 3 seminar halls, 2 lecture theatres, 1 VC room, 4 
executive rooms for workshop and training sessions, and 5 computer/ICT laboratories. 
The campus houses the Centers for Excellence in Executive Education (CEE), Journalism 
(CEJ), Information and Communication Technology (CICT), Center for Entrepreneurial 
Development (CED), Islamic Finance (CEIF), and Ofﬁce of Research Innovation and 
Commercialization (ORIC) at Aman Tower. Moreover, the HBL Building houses the 
incubations of the Center for Entrepreneurial Development (CED), QEC and Alumni 
Affairs, Resource Mobilization and Corporate Relations (ARC) ofﬁces.20 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Health centre
Martin Dow collaborated with the IBA to provide quality healthcare facilities for its 
students, faculty, and staff. The clinic is accessible 6 days a week and provides the 
students with high quality medical facilities at the campus.
Gymnasium
The facility of the gym is available for all IBA students, staff, faculty, and alumni in both 
Main and City campuses. The separate gyms for girls and boys are well-equipped with 
different workout machines enabling users to select a variety of workout plans. 
Moreover, the gym instructor educates users about ﬁtness and provides training to 
strengthen and maintain their physical health. Additionally, gym equipment for the 
visiting faculty residence and girls hostel is also available.
Main Campus
The IBA cafeterias at the Main and City campuses cater to the needs of the institute’s 
populace with hygienic meals, snacks, and refreshments that are available at affordable 
rates. Primary cafeteria facilities at the Main Campus can be found at the Alumni 
Students’ Center in the form of a Pepsi dining hall with an additional food outlet called 
Raptor. The cafeterias at the Adamjee Academic Center also offer their services to the 
students and faculty on working days. To facilitate the IBA community, the 
management arranged some more food outlets:
Main Campus cafeterias     
 Coffee shop in the library
 Kiosks (Nawab Dynasty, Kabab Hut, and GP Nice Food), a coffee shop inside the 
 Mian Abdullah Library
City Campus cafeterias  
 Cafeteria Aman Tower, 5th ﬂoor
 Pepsi cafeteria (ground ﬂoor parking area)
 Kiosks (Raptor Global & The Crepray)CafeteriasLibrary spaces
The libraries on both campuses provide a stimulating learning environment. The 
physical library facilities have been designed to accommodate contemporary learning 
styles, including Collaborative Commons and Rooms, Individual study spaces, 
Multimedia Learning, Research Commons, Faculty Commons, and a coffee shop.
Library services
The library strives to offer its patrons with a diverse range of innovative, academic, and 
research support services supported by cutting-edge technologies. The library services 
are intended to supplement lifelong learning. To learn more about the library services, 
visit http://library.iba.edu.pk
Library resources
The library subscribes to over 32 electronic databases, allowing campus-wide and 
remote access to a large collection of full-text multidisciplinary digital materials such as 
e-Journals, e-Books, case studies, and industry-related research analysis reports. In 
addition to these digital and printed resources, the library also manages iRepository, the 
digital repository to showcase the institutional archive, research, history, and 
accomplishments.
Moreover, around 77,000 print volumes are available in the library’s physical holdings, 
with an average of 1,500 new titles purchased each year.ATM and Banking facilities 
To cater to the banking needs of students, faculty, and staff members, both campuses 
are equipped with ATM machines installed by HBL. Furthermore, a few prominent bank 
branches are present within walking distance of both campuses. 
IBA also installed ATMs for the Girls Hostel and Staff Town to facilitate the community. 
An ATM for the boys hostel is also in the pipeline.
The library promotes teaching, learning, and research by acquiring relevant resources 
and proactively offering new services that are essential to foster learning. New learning 
resources, such as books, case studies, electronic databases, and indigenous research 
support materials are added to the library's collections on a regular basis.Librar y
The IBA facilitates the commute of students between both the campuses via a daily 
shuttle service offered during multiple slots throughout the day. The IBA also provides a 
transport service for students, who wish to avail it, residing in various parts of the city. 
Moreover, both campuses are easily accessible via public transport.Transportation  21 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
On Campus Accommodation - Hostels for Boys and Girls
Overview 
Facilities The IBA Karachi provides hostel facilities to its full-time, regular students from outside Karachi. Two 
hostels, one each for female and male students, are located within the premises of the University of 
Karachi. Both the hostels are secure spaces, guarded 24/7 by trained security professionals and 
through CCTV surveillance.
The hostels are spread over an area of 2.5 acres, surrounded by lush green lawns, trees, and gardens. 
Hostels’ design amalgamates the needs of modern urban living with sustainability, while vast and 
open corridors enable a pleasant, properly ventilated living space.
The IBA hostel life is a testimony to IBA’s diversity and inclusivity. Residents come from all over 
Pakistan and other countries and bring with them diverse cultural, economic, social, and religious 
backgrounds to share a similar bond, which is their association with the prestigious institution and 
with each other. The IBA hostels provide an atmosphere where students can learn and develop 
life-long associations while enjoying a comfortable setting.
Residents’ security is a top priority for the institute and the hostels are guarded 24/7 by professional 
security personnel, with the entrance and exit points under constant CCTV surveillance. The IBA Girls 
hostel is a secure, residential complex for the institute’s female students, managed by a female 
superintendent and a resident warden. The hostel is located near the IBA campus with the facility of 
a regular shuttle service.
The hostels’ residents are encouraged to live like one big family, helping each other wherever 
required and making hostels a home away from home. The hostel management makes tremendous 
efforts to provide the residents with a clean, hygienic and congenial environment to facilitate this 
brief but integral part of their professional journey. Discipline and compassion for fellows are two 
core values that the hostel management encourages and inculcates among students. The hostels 
foster a sense of ownership among residents, enabling them to create memories that they cherish 
for years. The hostel management also encourages the hostel residents to participate in numerous 
cultural and social activities that are organized by the Hostel Society. Some of these include the 
annual welcome dinner for the hostel freshman batch, Eid-Milad-un-Nabi, Basant and Diwali 
celebrations, cricket and football tournaments, and the annual farewell dinner for the hostel 
graduating batch.
All rooms are equipped with a smart wardrobe, study table with drawer, and a single bed with a 
closet compartment for additional storage. Below are the details of the facilities at the hostels:
Air-conditioned common rooms and TV lounges
Indoor gyms 
Game room 
Badminton court 
Laundry room1-
2-
3-
4-
5-Multi-purpose rooms for extra-curricular activities and green spaces for outdoor sports and other 
activities 
Air-conditioned dining halls 
High-speed internet facility 
Prayer room 
Subsidized laundry services (for men’s hostel) 
Chilled water dispensers (potable water) 
24-hour tuck shop/ vending machine 
On-campus healthcare facility 
On-campus mental wellness counsellor6-
7-
8-
9-
10-
11-
12-
13-
14-
To apply for accommodation, click here: https://onlineadmission.iba.edu.pkBoys hostel
Capacity: 469 
Single Rooms: 435  
Shared Rooms: 07 
Dormitories: 10 Girls hostel
Capacity: 160 
Single Rooms: 6
Shared Rooms: 77 
Dr. Mohsin Sadaqat,
Superintendent 
mohsin@iba.edu.pk 
Ext. 3053
Mr. Mujahid Hussain Detho,
Warden 
mhussain@iba.edu.pk 
Ext. 2015Ms. Mahwish Butt,
Assistant Manager (Admin) Girls hostel 
mbutt@iba.edu.pk 
Ext: 1817For queries, please contact:
Student services
Career Development Centre (CDC)
The IBA Career Development Center (CDC) is a comprehensive resource center dedicated to 
supporting students and graduates in all aspects of their careers. The CDC plays a vital role in 
facilitating internships and job placements, as well as fostering the development of essential 
employment skills and occupational competencies desired by employers. Serving as a bridge 
between the IBA community and the industry, the CDC collaborates with employers across various 
sectors to fulﬁll its core mission of assisting students and graduates in ﬁnding the right job in their 
desired ﬁeld with the right employer.
The primary objective of the CDC is to guide members of the IBA community in deﬁning their career 
goals through programs and interventions that provide learning opportunities tailored to their 
individual needs. As catalysts for success, the CDC staff offers support in honing interview skills, 
formulating effective job search strategies, and preparing impressive resumes and cover letters.
Here is an overview of the services offered by the CDC to IBA students:
1. In-house career advisory: We provide personalized career advisory services to students, helping 
them make informed decisions and plan their career paths. Requests are handled on a ﬁrst-come, 
ﬁrst-served basis, depending on the availability of the CDC's resource person.
2. IBA Job Portal: Our online platform, the IBA Job Portal, serves as a powerful tool for connecting 
students and alumni with employers. It acts as a repository for the graduate directory, allowing 
students and alumni to create proﬁles and access job/internship opportunities. Employers can 
post vacancies, view proﬁles, and save them for hiring purposes. The portal has attracted over 1100 
employers within a short period.
3. Guest Speaker Series: The CDC organizes a series of sessions, workshops, and panel discussions 
called the ‘Corporate Connect Series’. These events feature guest speakers from various industries 
and aim to connect students with the corporate sector. The themes for these sessions are 
identiﬁed in collaboration with the faculty, providing students with practical insights into their 
chosen ﬁelds of study and preparing them for the job market. An online system is also in place to 
facilitate requests from faculty members and for inviting guest speakers.
4. Career Excursions: Throughout the year, the CDC organizes career excursions that allow students 
to learn about different companies, explore internship and job opportunities, interact with 
employees, and tour facilities.
5. Learning Hub: The Learning Hub is a newly launched segment focused on experiential learning 
beyond the classroom. It offers seminars, interactive talks, virtual and on-site training, skills-based 
workshops, and real-time simulations. This segment aims to bridge the gap between theoretical 
knowledge and real-world application, equipping students with essential skills required in today's 
competitive workforce.6. Responsible Citizen Initiative (RCI) / Social Internships: As part of their undergraduate programs, 
all students are required to engage in six weeks of social work known as the Responsible Citizen 
Initiative or Social Internships. Students work with social sector organizations, NGOs, 
community-based organizations, or charitable institutes in Pakistan during their summers or as 
their schedules allow. The CDC has established partnerships with numerous NGOs where our 
students can conduct their social internships.
7. Corporate/Research Internships: Corporate internships are mandatory for undergraduate 
students in all programs, as well as MBA students with a non-BBA background. These internships 
are completed after the junior year for undergraduates and after the ﬁrst year for MBA students. 
Additionally, students in the Social Sciences program (BS-SSLA) undertake research internships 
lasting 6 to 8 weeks as part of their curriculum requirements. The CDC not only facilitates 
connections between students and recruiters but also helps students ﬁnd internship 
opportunities.
8. Online application system for submitting internship documents: After completing their 
internships, students are required to submit their internship documents to the CDC ofﬁce. An 
online application system is available, allowing students to conveniently submit all the required 
documents, including the internship report, certiﬁcate/letter of completion, and supervisor 
evaluation form. The application is synchronized with the ERP, providing an efﬁcient solution for 
the documentation and archiving of internship records. 
9. Online requisition of recommendation letters for internships: Students can request general or 
customized recommendation letters for their social and corporate/research internships through 
an online system on the Student Facilitation System.
10. Career Fair: The CDC organizes an annual career fair that provides a platform for potential 
employers to showcase their corporate image to emerging leaders. This event allows students to 
interact with over 100 companies, making it an invaluable opportunity for networking and 
exploring career options.
23 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Career Development Centre (CDC)
11. On-Campus Recruitment Drives: Throughout the year, the CDC hosts multiple on-campus 
recruitment activities where employers visit the IBA campuses to conduct company orientation 
sessions, interviews, assessments, and other related activities. These activities are typically 
scheduled from January to May and target students graduating in the Fall and Spring semesters.
12. Experiential Learning Projects (ELP): The ELP program is a mandatory four-month initiative for 
ﬁnal semester BBA and BS-Accounting & Finance students. Students work in groups to conduct 
primary and ﬁeld research, analyze relevant issues, and propose effective solutions. ELPs provide 
students with practical industry knowledge and an introduction to potential organizations. For 
more information, visit https://elp.iba.edu.pk.
13. Mentoring Matters: The IBA beneﬁts from a strong alumni network of over 13,000 individuals who 
actively support their alma mater. Mentoring Matters is a comprehensive coaching program that 
connects students with prominent IBA alumni and industry experts, offering guidance for 
personal and professional development.
14. Maverick Program: This platform provides one-on-one advisory sessions for students to discuss 
their career-related concerns with industry experts. These personalized sessions help students 
explore various career opportunities that align with their unique interests and skills, assisting 
them in formulating personalized plans to achieve their career goals.
15. Mock interviews: As part of the Maverick Program, the CDC offers mock interviews, which are 
tailored conversational exercises simulating real job interviews. Through these exercises, students 
gain valuable experience and guidance under the mentorship of industry experts, helping them 
better prepare for actual interviews.
16. Graduate proﬁling / Graduate proﬁle book: The CDC publishes Proﬁle Books on the IBA Job Portal 
every year, serving as a repository of information for employers seeking potential employees. 
Graduates can update their proﬁles regularly, ensuring up-to-date information for recruitment 
purposes.
17. Career resources: The CDC provides a range of career resources, including articles, interactive 
media insights, recruitment toolkits, expert opinions and reviews, research materials, and other 
resources related to careers and skills development. These resources cater to the diverse needs of 
users on the Job Portal.
18. The IBA Career Development Center (CDC) offers postgraduate studies counseling services to 
support students in their pursuit of higher education. The CDC provides personalized guidance to 
students, helping them navigate the complex process of choosing and applying to postgraduate 
programs. The counselors assist students in assessing their academic backgrounds, interests, and 
career aspirations to identify suitable programs and areas of specialization. They also provide 
guidance on the application process, offer feedback on application materials, and help students prepare for standardized tests. Additionally, the CDC hosts informative sessions and events to 
provide students with valuable insights into postgraduate studies. These sessions feature guest 
speakers, faculty members, and alumni who share their experiences and expertise. The sessions 
cover various aspects of postgraduate studies, including program options, admission 
requirements, funding opportunities, and career prospects. The CDC also collaborates with 
organizations such as Education USA and IDP to enhance its counseling services. Overall, the 
CDC's postgraduate studies counseling services, info sessions, and partnerships with 
organizations like Education USA and IDP aim to empower students with the information and 
resources they need to make informed decisions about their postgraduate education and 
successfully pursue their academic and career goals.
19. Digital media platforms: The CDC maintains various digital media platforms to keep IBA students 
and graduates updated on important career development announcements, internships, jobs, and 
other relevant information. These platforms include a dedicated Facebook group, a Facebook 
page, a LinkedIn group and page, and a Twitter account.
To connect with us, visit the following networks:
Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/ibacdc.khi/
Facebook Group (restricted to IBA students and alumni): https://www.facebook.com/groups/ibacdc
Email: cdc@iba.edu.pk | teamcdc@iba.edu.pk
Twitter: https://twitter.com/ibacdc
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/ibacdc/
Website: https://cdc.iba.edu.pk
24 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Career Development Centre (CDC)Ofﬁce of Student Affairs
As Dean of Student Affairs (DSA), I am delighted to welcome you all to the Institute of Business Administration (IBA), 
Karachi. I am very excited to have you all on campus and look forward to getting to know you as you get connected to the 
IBA community. As the DSA, my role is to ensure that your non-academic needs are met during your time here. My Ofﬁce 
plays an integral role in community engagement, talent, and skill development, and student leadership development; 
students are encouraged to participate in student-led clubs and societies and the IBA Student Government (ISG). By 
providing opportunities for students to get involved, develop new skills, and make a positive impact in their community, 
my aim is to enhance the overall student experience at the IBA. 
We provide support to students, through health and wellness programs and diversity and accessibility services and 
programs, to foster a safe, welcoming, and inclusive environment at the IBA, where students can grow both academically 
and personally.
As Dean Student Affairs, I also believe in enriching your university experience by encouraging you to participate in leadership development, 
coaching, and peer programs to foster learning, growth, and community development. You may face challenges, and that is what the Ofﬁce of 
Student Affairs is here for - to support you and connect you to faculty, staff, and campus resources. What is close to my heart is fostering a culture 
of inclusion, mutual respect, and tolerance amongst the IBA community.
Looking forward to meeting you all for an engaging and diverse experience! Wishing you all the best!
Maheen Ghauri
Dean - Student AffairsDean’s Message
25 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24 Ofﬁce of Student Af fairs
The Ofﬁce of Student Affairs at IBA is dedicated to creating an 
engaging and diverse experience for every student at the IBA 
Karachi. The Ofﬁce plays an integral role in community 
engagement, talent and skill development, and student 
leadership development. It provides students with opportunities 
to extend their passions, talents, and competencies beyond 
academia by participating in curricular, co-curricular, and 
service-oriented activities. The Ofﬁce proactively responds and is 
adaptable to student-centric needs, and evolving trends and 
priorities. 
Student Affairs is also committed to fostering a culture of 
inclusion, mutual respect, and tolerance with respect to diversity. 
It plays a pivotal role in promoting a safe, welcoming, and 
inclusive environment and campus life for students, especially for 
those who may have disabilities or special needs – our job is to 
support students’ individual and group needs and to endorse the 
value of a diverse society.
The Ofﬁce of Student Affairs is a one-stop solution to address all 
student needs and queries, to direct them to the relevant schools 
and student support ofﬁces, including facilitating them with 
academic, career, mental health, or general counseling as well.
For details, please visit: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/
The student service and support ofﬁces that fall under the 
Student Affairs umbrella are:Ofﬁce of Student Societies 
The Ofﬁce of Student Societies (OSS) believes in creating 
a culture of inclusiveness and promoting self-discovery 
and diversity through multiple student activities. OSS 
encourages students to try out new things and 
participate in activities that enrich their lives outside of 
academics. Through these co-/extracurricular activities, 
students get involved in campus life and get to know 
themselves and others. The Ofﬁce of Student Societies 
plays an integral part in the holistic development of the 
students that happens when they participate in different 
activities happening on and off campus. There are 30+ 
student run societies that work under the umbrella of 
the Ofﬁce of Student Societies. Through these societies, 
OSS sets a benchmark of commitment, trust, hard work 
and leadership for all students to follow. The Ofﬁce of 
Student Societies caters to all domains of interests that a 
student could possibly pursue, and if a club/society is not 
available students can request OSS, and a committee will 
look into it. 
For details, please visit: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/oss/
IBA Student Government: 
The student government at the IBA is a representative 
body that serves as the voice of the student body. 
Comprised of elected representatives from each of the 
three schools at the IBA, the student government plays a 
crucial role in shaping the student experience by 
advocating for the needs and concerns of the student 
body to the administration and faculty. 
The student government is responsible for organizing 
and coordinating various events and initiatives 
throughout the year, such as orientation, farewell and 
many other engaging events. The Ofﬁce of Student 
Societies also helps to allocate funding to student 
societies and clubs, ensuring that they have the 
resources they need to thrive. 
In addition to these responsibilities, the student 
government also serves as a liaison between the student 
body and the administration, working to improve 
communication and collaboration between the two. This 
allows for a more efﬁcient and effective resolution of 
issues and concerns that students may have.
For details, please visit: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/oss/isg.php
International Resource Center (IRC)
The International Resource Center facilitates students in 
extending their learning by complementing their 
academic experience with international exposure. The 
IRC team coordinates and collaborates with the top 
international universities and assists students who are 
looking for ﬁnancial assistance and scholarships. The IRC 
team also facilitates with:
 Exchange programs                               
 Visiting programs
 Summer/winter programs 
 Graduate and postgraduate admissions and 
 scholarships 
 English proﬁciency letters
 Visa letters
 NOCs for exchanges
 Participation in conferences and competitions 
For further details: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/irc/ 
26 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Health and wellness/ student counseling
IBA believes that mental health of its students is just as important 
as their physical health. The Health and Wellness Center at IBA 
provides multi-level mental health facilities for our students.  For 
Wellness Counseling, please see the link below and make an 
appointment with our dedicated team of Clinical 
Psychologists/Wellness Counselors and Psychiatrist by clicking 
on the available slots on our website. 
Students are encouraged to visit the website 
https://healthandwellnesscenter.iba.edu.pk/ or reach out to 
Health and Wellness Center, Martin Dow.Ofﬁce of diversity, accessibility, and inclusion
Student Affairs believes and works on the premise that every 
student is unique, belonging to diverse backgrounds. It aims to 
create an inclusive environment, accepting every individual’s 
different background, characteristics, and differences in 
perspective and demographics, which include race, age, religion, 
disability, and gender, as well as skills, experiences, and abilities. It 
aims to eliminate discrimination, break down barriers, and 
facilitate and ensure equal opportunities and access for all 
students.
For further details: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/odai/
Students are offered opportunities to work part-time 
on both campuses during the semester and the 
summer. They can be employed in various 
departments (administrative, academic, or support 
service departments). These can be both paid 
(student employment) or unpaid (volunteering). The 
number of work hours per week differs based on the 
nature of employment. Student Affairs also helps 
students in search for volunteering opportunities 
outside IBA as well.
Student employment and volunteering allow 
students to develop their professional and soft skills 
and academic expertise. It also teaches them life 
skills, including building a sense of responsibility and 
work ethic.Student employment and volunteering
Student leadership, coaching, and peer programs
To enrich the university experience, students can participate in 
leadership development, coaching, or peer programs that foster 
learning, growth, community development, and peer support. 
These students can attend workshops, seminars, and programs 
that will build their skills to motivate, inﬂuence, and guide other 
students at IBA. Students can realize their potential through such 
programs, and provide support to students experiencing 
challenges, connecting them to faculty and staff, and to campus 
resources.
27 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Activities studio
28 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Activities studio
SCHOOL OF
BUSINESS
STUDIES (SBS)29 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-2430 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
The Institute of Business Administration, (IBA) is one of the most prestigious higher education institutions located in the city of Karachi, the ﬁnancial hub of Pakistan. The School of Business 
Studies (SBS) is the largest and ﬂagship School in IBA. SBS is also a leading business school within Pakistan with a state-of-the-art campus which follows the best international standards 
and offers faculty and students a unique learning and teaching experience along with well-equipped spaces conducive for teamwork and creativity. SBS is actively pursuing the AACSB 
accreditation and has already achieved a key milestone in the AACSB journey. SBS faculty comprises distinguished experts across a variety of business disciplines and hold doctorates from 
world-renowned universities. The school offers a wide range of programs in different management disciplines to train a new generation of high-potential executives.School of Business Studies (SBS)
Department of Accounting and Law
The programs offered at the Department of Accounting and Law provide conceptual and 
practical knowledge that enables our graduates to successfully ﬁnd solutions and 
navigate their way in today's challenging market. The department’s faculty, who are 
professional accountants, and lawyers with extensive practical experience, focus on 
imparting contemporary knowledge through practical problems and cases.
Department of Management
With an emphasis on preparing students for attaining profound critical thinking and 
analytical skills in the ﬁeld of management, the Department of Management endeavors 
to impart theoretical and practical knowledge in the specialized areas of strategy, 
organization, operations management, entrepreneurship, and leadership.Department of Finance
The Department of Finance offers a variety of courses to inculcate ﬁnancial 
decision-making skills in students. The department is dedicated to developing and 
maintaining a curriculum integrating information technology, ethics and sustainability. 
The diverse faculty of the department contributes to impactful research and regularly 
engages with the business community for experiential learning of the students, 
knowledge creation and continuous improvement of the curriculum. 
Department of Marketing
Our students are propelled from the basic to more critical and specialist levels at the 
Department of Marketing.  The courses help students learn about the traditional and the 
most recent advances in marketing using local and international case studies, 
simulations, and other experiential exercises. Students can connect marketing theory 
with practice and are prepared for a career across any industry. Overview of departmentsWelcome to the School of Business Studies (SBS), IBA. I am proud to share with you the factors that make our school the right place to receive an unrivaled 
business education in Pakistan.
Our location in Karachi provides us an outstanding backdrop to leverage our distinctively talented student body and world-class faculty to liaison with 
corporate Pakistan and numerous multinationals, situated in the metropolis. The IBA Karachi has ingrained its mark in the history of Pakistan through its 
strong alumni network, making it a legacy of the IBA. As Dean, SBS, I feel privileged to lead the school which is on a trajectory of nurturing many more 
graduates who will leave their mark around the world in all walks of life.
I am ﬁlled with great optimism about our future and feel delighted in afﬁrming that we are entering a new era where we are setting out to embark on an 
ambitious journey. Once SBS secures AACSB accreditation, it will place us among the upper echelon of business schools worldwide. Consolidating that 
our emphasis would be to secure further prestigious accreditations globally to validate the good things we do. We are also striving for SBS to feature 
prominently in the global league tables. Furthermore, the SBS will actively pursue international academic collaborations with top business schools which 
will create meaningful exchange opportunities for students and faculty members.
We live in an era of disruptions, where conventional methods of teaching, research and industry best practices are becoming redundant. Globally and 
locally, such disruptions are pressing business schools to engage in thoughtful leadership and demand agility to stay relevant. The SBS is very student-centric and provides  a holistic 
student experience.
With a market-driven curriculum across our programs, we differentiate ourselves with a powerful combination of top academic talent from around Pakistan, a vibrant business 
community at our doorstep and a world-class faculty aiming to make a difference. We aim to engage with our alumni in a robust fashion to further deepen our industry linkages. The 
key focus of the school is on teaching effectiveness and impactful intellectual contributions. The ethos of innovation, entrepreneurship and commercialization remain at the heart of 
the process where faculty, students and corporate leaders engage in a purposeful manner to create unique constellations to solve indigenous and global challenges.
Dr. Abdullah Z. SheikhDean’s Message
Bachelor of Business Administration
(BBA)31 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
The Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) is a full-time 128 credit hours 
program comprising of four years of rigorous education which allows the student 
to have a broader view of the business world. The academic program does not 
only emphasize the essentials of business subjects but also introduces students 
to the basic knowledge of Social Sciences during their freshman and sophomore 
years. Additionally, students are required to enroll in one of the four foreign 
language courses that are, Arabic, Chinese, French and German. All BBA 
students are required to enroll in Personal Effectiveness, a non-credit course 
which builds and enhances soft skills and helps in the personality development 
of the students. Although there are no formally labeled specializations, students 
can opt for any combination of electives from Marketing, Accounting, Finance, 
Supply Chain, Human Resource Management (HRM), and Entrepreneurship. 
Based on the feedback from the alumni and human resource representatives of 
major corporations, the IBA has included experiential learning into the 
curriculum. Students must undergo two internships (one as a responsible citizen 
initiative in an NGO and another in a corporate organization) and a semester 
long experiential learning project (ELP), which is in the form of a project awarded 
by corporate clients, an on-the-job training in the real business environment. This 
allows the students to network with their future employers and introduces them 
to the challenges of the real business world. Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Program learning competencies
1. Effective communication skills
 Students will develop the ability to become effective speakers, listeners, 
writers, and team members.
2. Knowledge of core business disciplines
 Students will gain a broad-based multidisciplinary exposure to a range of 
business disciplines.
3. Critical thinking skills
 Students will develop the ability to classify, analyze and evaluate the available 
data using appropriate techniques for effective decision-making.
4. Ethics
 Students will develop an awareness and understanding of ethical issues.
5. Glocal Mindset
 Students will develop focus on global connections with local contexts 
through awareness of diversity across cultures and markets.
Breakdown of credit hoursProgram structure
Time to completion
Minimum regular semesters
Core courses
Elective Courses
Experiential Learning Project (RCI) Internship
Total
Responsible Citizen Initiative
Corporate Internship (6-8 Weeks)
Personal Effective Program**4 Years
8
32
8
1
40 + ELP
1
1
10 Hours 
 
98*
24
6
128
 -
- 
 -Credit hours
*Two Language courses are of 4 credit hours each. Other courses are of 3 credit hours each.
** Personal Effectiveness program is a 10-hour seminar series conducted by industry professionals
(Non-Credit Course).Course category
University core courses
Business core courses
Non-Specialization core courses
Business electives
Non-Specialization electives
Total required coursework
Experiential Learning Project
Total credit hoursCourses
4
23
5
5
3
40
 -Credit hours
12
71
15
15
9
122
6
128Equivalent
to 2 coursesACC111 3 -Principles of
AccountingBusiness
Core1
MTS102 3 -Introduction to
StatisticsNon
Specialization
Core5
MTS101 3 - Calculus 1Non
Specialization
Core6-ECO104 3 -Principles of
MacroeconomicsBusiness
Core2
HUM201 3Speech
CommunicationUniversity
Core3
- MGT201 3Principles of
ManagementBusiness
Core4Semester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeECO211 3ECO103,
ECO104Analysis of Pakistani
IndustriesBusiness Core 1
MTS212 3 MTS101Business Mathematics
and Linear AlgebraNon 
Specialization 
Core5FIN201FIN301 3 FIN201Financial Institutions
and MarketingBusiness Core 2
FIN401 3Financial
ManagementBusiness Core 3
SSC101,
HUM201MGT211 3Business
CommunicationBusiness Core 4Semester-4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeSemester-wise sequence of courses
ACC201 3 ACC111 Financial Accounting Business Core 1
MTS202 3 MTS102Statistical Inference
(With econometrics lab)Non
Specialization
Core5
SSC151 3 - Pakistan HistoryUniversity
Core6FIN201 3 -Introduction to
Business FinanceBusiness Core 2
SSC104
MGT201MGT221 3Organizational
BehaviorBusiness Core 3
- MKT201 3Principles of
MarketingBusiness Core 4Sophomore Semester-3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeECO103 3 -Principles of
MicroeconomicsBusiness Core 1
SSC104 3 -Foundations of
Human BehaviorBusiness
Core5HUM357/
SSC3013 -Socioeconomic
Philosophy of Islam
(SEPI) / Philosophy,
Logic and Ethics (PLE)**University
Core2
- MIS103 3Introduction to
Computer ApplicationsNon
Specialization
Core3
- SSC101 3English Grammar &
CompositionUniversity
Core4Freshman Semester-1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MGT311 3 MGT201Production &
Operations ManagementBusiness Core 1
- 3 - Business Elective IBusiness
Elective5MKT201MGT421 3FIN201,
MGT201,
MKT201Entrepreneurship Business Core 2
MKT401 3Marketing Issues
in PakistanBusiness Core 3
SSC201/
205/209SSC202/
206/2104 Language-II Business Core 4Semester-6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeACC220 3 ACC201Management
AccountingBusiness Core 1
SSC201/
205/2094 - Language-I Business Core 5HRM401 3 MGT221Human Resource
ManagementBusiness Core 2
- LAW205 3 Business Law Business Core 3
MKT201
MTS202MKT301 3Methods of
Business ResearchBusiness Core 4Junior Semester-5Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typePRJ491 6MKT301,
MGT430Experiential learning
project (ELP)Experiential
learning
project1
-- 3 - Business elective IV Elective 2
- 3 Business elective VFinance
Elective3
- 3Non Specialization
Elective IIICore 4Semester-8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeSemester-wise sequence of courses
- 3Non Specialization
Elective INon
Specialization
Elective5
- 3 -Non Specialization
Elective IINon
Specialization
Elective6SSC240 -Personal Effectiveness
(non-credit course)Non-Credit 2
- 3 Business elective IIBusiness
Elective3
- 3 Business elective IIIBusiness
Elective4MGT430 3ECO103,
ECO104,
FIN201,
MKT201,
ACC201,
MGT311,
HRM401Managerial Policy Business Core 1Senior Semester-7Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Business electives
Students select 5 courses as business electives. These may be chosen from any of 
the courses offered by the Business School that are not core courses for the BBA 
program or their equivalents. These elective courses therefore include, courses 
offered by  Finance department (usually course codes beginning with FIN), 
Accounting and Law department (beginning with ACC  and LAW),  Marketing 
department  (usually beginning with MKT) and the Management department 
(usually beginning with MGT,  HRM,  ENT  and SCM),  subject to fulﬁllment of 
pre-requisites. List of course offerings differ semester to semester and students 
can ﬁnd the current offerings on the website or with the relevant program 
ofﬁces. A reference list is provided below.** Muslim students must take SEPI according to HEC regulations. Non-Muslim students can take 
either of the two courses.Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
ACC231
ACC310
ACC315
ACC320
ACC325
ACC330
ACC401
FIN424
FIN451
FIN453
FIN454
FIN455
FIN456
FIN457
FIN462
FIN463
FIN464
FIN465
FIN467
FIN4683
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
ACC220
ACC201
-
ACC320
ACC201
ACC315
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
-
FIN401
FIN301
FIN401
FIN401Globalization & International Law
Advanced Managerial Accounting
Financial Reporting
Auditing
Advanced Auditing
Accounting Information System with SAP
Advanced Financial Reporting
Fixed Income Investments
Investment Banking
Security Analysis
Corporate Finance
Portfolio Management
Financial Risk Management
Derivatives
Treasury and Funds Management
Islamic Banking & Finance
Financial Modeling
Regulations and Financial Markets
Marketing of Financial Service
Venture Capital & Innovation in Finance
LAW105
LAW202
LAW303
LAW305
LAW310
LAW401
MGT102
MGT3013
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
LAW205
ACC201
LAW205
LAW205
LAW303
-
MGT201Politics and Law
Company Law
Taxation
Corporate Law
Legal & Regularity Environment
Advanced Taxation
Foundation for Management & Entrepreneurship - I
Ethics In Corporate SocietyHRM430 3MGT201,
HRM401Recruitment & Selection Techniques
HRM453 3MGT201,
HRM401Life Career Development
HRM455 3MGT201,
HRM401Executive Leadership
HRM456 3MGT201,
HRM401Training and Development
HRM457 3MGT201, 
HRM401HR and Information System
HRM462 3MGT201,
HRM401Performance & Compensation 
MGT401 3MGT201,
MKT201Small Business Management
MGT452 3 - International Business34 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Non-specialization electives
Students must choose three electives as non-specialization elective courses from any 
discipline offered by any school at the IBA other than those offered from business school. 
These courses must not be the same or equivalents of the core courses in the program. 
These courses can be from Mathematics, Computer Sciences, Economics and Social 
Sciences disciplines. List of course offerings differ semester to semester and students can 
ﬁnd the current offerings on the website or with the relevant program ofﬁces.
Experiential learning and lifelong learning mindset
The curriculum of the BBA   program is enriched with experiential learning opportunities 
and activities aimed at developing lifelong learning mindset. A full-ﬂedged personal 
effectiveness seminar series is included as part of the curriculum that every student must 
complete as a mandatory requirement for graduation. Many courses include guest 
speaker sessions from industry experts. Some courses also include formal corporate visits. 
Furthermore, term projects also require students to study, analyze and document a 
real-life business problem and help them connect with the industry. Some courses in 
management require students to launch a startup as part of the course project. This helps 
the students to put theory into practice. There are various success stories as a few of these 
startups are now working as well-developed businesses. Some of them also manage to get 
investments.
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
MGT454
MKT350
MKT353
MKT354
MKT355
MKT356
MKT4503
3
3
3
3
3
3-
MKT201
MKT201
-
MKT201
MKT201
MKT201Strategic Management
Introduction to Trade Marketing
Introduction to Marketing Analytics
Data Manipulation & Visualization
Marketing for Startups
Media Management
Fundamentals of E-Commerce
MKT451 3MKT201,
MKT401Advertising
MKT452 3MKT201,
MKT301Consumer Behavior
MKT461 3MKT201,
MKT301,
MKT401Brand ManagementMKT453
MKT455
MKT4583
3
3MKT201
MKT201
MKT201Sales Management
Retailing
Public Relations
MKT463
MKT465
MKT466
MKT467
MKT468
SCM456
SCM457
SCM4623
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
-
-
MKT201
-
-
-
-Social Marketing
B2B  Marketing
Digital Marketing
Analytical Approach to Marketing Decisions
Social Media Marketing
Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management
Introduction to Distribution & Logistics
Essentials of Demand & Supply35 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Internships
To provide students with an early exposure to the business world, a formal corporate 
internship must be carried out after completing the 6th semester (i.e. after completion of 
all the courses till 6th semester). However, students joining from the spring semester can 
be provided an exception to carry out their corporate internships during the subsequent 
summer after their 5th semester. These internships are a mandatory requirement for 
graduation. Career Development Center at IBA coordinates for the necessary 
requirements for the internship.
Experiential Learning Project (ELP)
Experiential Learning Project (ELP) is a mandatory and concluding part of the BBA 
program. It is a semester long project in a corporate entity, an on-the-job training in a real 
business environment. The ELP allows the students to network with their future employers 
and introduces them to the challenges of the real business world. The project is equivalent 
to 6 credit hours and the grade is also incorporated in the CGPA of the students. Detailed 
requirements of the ELP program are available from the program coordinator ofﬁce and 
are provided to the students during their seventh semester. For more information: 
https://elp.iba.edu.pk/.
Positive societal impact
Ethical mindset and societal considerations are infused into the BBA curriculum through 
various avenues including course embedded topics such as the Code of Ethics is part of the 
curriculum in the courses related to Accounting and Auditing, term projects, and social 
internships.
Social internship program
In undergraduate programs, social internship (called the Responsible Citizen Initiative) is a 
mandatory requirement of completing the learning cycle. Students are required to work in  
Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) or a social enterprise for a period of four to six 
weeks to get exposure to the social problems and contribute at ground level.
This can be done after the 1st year of studies / 2nd semester and must be completed by the 
end of the 3rd year of studies/6th semester. Career Development Center at IBA coordinates 
for the necessary requirements for the internship.Term projects with societal impacts
Many courses have the element of term project. Some of these projects also have an 
objective of social contribution apart from providing an experiential learning avenue. 
Recent examples include career counselling programs for school students from 
underprivileged backgrounds and organizing events that have a positive social impact 
under the management courses.
Use of technology and innovative pedagogy
The curriculum encourages the use of the latest technology applications in its courses 
related to different business functions. These emerging technologies are continuously 
identiﬁed through market trends and are made part of the curricula after certain 
deliberations through the course review process. Some courses in BBA program 
integrating software teaching include, Methods in Business Research (SPSS), Financial 
Management, Financial Modelling (Advanced Excel), Introduction to Marketing Analytics 
(R  and R  studio), Data Manipulation and Visualization (Power BI), Accounting Information 
System with SAP  and Financial Econometrics (E views).
Another way the program fosters technological exposure to its students is through the 
integration of technology in pedagogy. The use of games and simulations, course projects, 
video case studies and blended learning (online courses like Coursera) require students to 
keep in constant touch with recent technology platforms.
36 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Bachelor of Science (BS) 
Accounting and Finance Program structure
The Bachelor of Science (BS) in Accounting and Finance is a full-time 126 credit 
hours program comprising 4-year of rigorous education.  The program is 
designed to provide an exclusive opportunity to students to receive a 
specialization in Accounting and Finance. The graduates of this program obtain 
multiple exemptions from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan 
(ICAP) and the Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants (ACCA). 
Furthermore, the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), 
Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan (ICMAP), and 
Institute of Bankers Pakistan (IBP) also provide exemptions on a case-to-case 
basis to the program graduates. Details of such exemptions may be found on 
relevant websites and secretariats of these institutions.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Program learning competencies
1. Effective communication skills
 Students will develop the ability to become effective speakers, listeners, 
writers, and team members.
2. Knowledge of core business disciplines
 Students will gain a broad-based multidisciplinary exposure to a range of 
business disciplines.
3. Critical thinking skills
 Students will develop the ability to classify, analyze and evaluate the available 
data using appropriate techniques for effective decision making.
4. Ethics
 Students will develop an awareness and understanding of ethical issues.
5. Glocal Mindset
 Students will develop a focus on global connections with local contexts 
through awareness of diversity across cultures and markets.Time to completion
Minimum regular semesters
Core courses
Elective courses
Experiential Learning Project (ELP)
Total
Responsible Citizen Initiative (RCI) internship
Corporate internship (6-8 weeks)
Personal effectiveness program**4 years
8
23
17
1
40 + ELP
1
1
10 hours-
-
69
51
6
126
-
-
-Credit hours
* Personal effectiveness program is a 10-hour seminar series conducted by industry professionals.
Breakdown of credit hours
Course category
University Core Courses
Accounting Core Courses
Finance Core Courses
Non-specialization Core Courses
Accounting Elective Courses
Finance Elective Courses
Non-specialization Elective Courses
Total Required Coursework
Experiential Learning Project
Total Credit HoursCourses
4
6
5
8
6
7
4
40
1
-Credit hours
12
18
15
24
18
21
12
120
6
126Semester-wise sequence of courses
ACC111 3 -Principles of
AccountingAccounting
Core1
SSC101 3 -Critical Reading and
WritingUniversity
Core5
SSC151 3 - Pakistan HistoryUniversity
Core6-ECO105 3 -Introduction to
EconomicsNon
Specialization
Core2
MTS102 3Introduction to
StatisticsNon
Specialization
Core3
- MTS101 3 Calculus 1Non
Specialization
Core4Freshman Semester-1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ACC381 3 ACC201Management
AccountingAccounting
Core1
- 3 - NS Elective IINon
Specialization
Elective5-LAW303 3 ACC201 TaxationAccounting
Core2
- 3Accounting
elective IAccounting
Elective3
- - 3 NS Elective INon
Specialization
Elective4Semester-4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ACC320 3 ACC201 AuditingAccounting
Core1
- 3 -Accounting
elective IIAccounting
Elective5FIN301FIN464 3 FIN401 Financial ModelingFinance 
Core2
FIN465 3Regulations and
Financial MarketsFinance 
Core3
SSC101/
HUM201MGT211 3Business
CommunicationNon
Specialization
Elective4Junior Semester-5Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
- 3 -Accounting
elective IIIAccounting
Elective1
- 3 - NS elective IIINon
Specialization
Elective5-- 3 - Finance elective IFinance
Elective2
- 3 Finance elective IIFinance
Elective3
- - 3 Finance elective IIIFinance
Elective4Semester-6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeACC201 3 ACC111Financial
AccountingAccounting
Core1
MTS102 3 -Introduction to
Computer ApplicationNon
Specialization
Core5
SSC301/
HUM3573 -Islamic Scholarly Tradition /
Philosophy,  Logic and Ethics
(PLE)*University
Core6-FIN201 3 -Introduction to
Business FinanceFinance
core2
HUM201 3Speech
CommunicationUniversity
Core3
- LAW205 3 Business LawAccounting
Core4Semester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
FIN301 3 FIN201Financial Institutions
and MarketsFinance
Core1
MTS202 3 MTS102Statistical Inference
with EconometricsNon
Specialization
Core5-FIN401 3 FIN201Financial
ManagementFinance
core2
MGT231 3Management and
Organizational
BehaviourNon
Specialization
Core3
- MKT201 3Principles of
MarketingNon
Specialization
Core4Sophomore Semester-3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeSemester-wise sequence of courses
- 3 -Accounting
elective IVAccounting
Elective1
- 3 - Finance elective VIFinance
Elective5-- 3 - NS elective IVNon
Specialization
Elective2
- 3 Finance elective IVFinance
Elective3
- - 3 Finance elective VFinance
Elective4Senior Semester-7Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
* Muslim students must take SEPI according to HEC regulations. Non-Muslim students can take either of the 
two courses.
Accounting electives (6 to be selected)
Accounting elective courses may constitute any of the courses offered by the Accounting 
and Law department (subject to fulﬁlment of pre-requisites) that is not a core course. The 
relevant courses have the course code in the format of ACCXXX and LAWXXX. The list of 
course offerings differ semester to semester and students can ﬁnd the current offerings on 
the website or with the relevant program ofﬁces.
A reference list of accounting elective courses is given below (offered in the last year).
S. No. Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Globalization & International Law
Advanced Managerial Accounting
Financial Reporting
Advanced Auditing
Accounting Information System with SAP
Advanced Financial Reporting
Politics and Law
Corporate Law
Legal & Regularity Environment
Advanced TaxationACC231
ACC310
ACC315
ACC325
ACC330
ACC401
LAW105
LAW305
LAW310
LAW4013
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
ACC220
ACC201
ACC320
ACC201
ACC315
-
LAW205
LAW205
LAW3031
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10Finance electives (7 to be selected)
Finance elective courses may constitute any of the courses offered by the Finance 
department (subject to fulﬁllment of pre-requisites). These courses usually have code in 
the format of FINXXX. The list of course offerings differ semester to semester and students 
can ﬁnd the current offerings on the relevant website or with the relevant program ofﬁces.
A reference list of ﬁnance elective courses is given below (offered in the last year).
Non-specialization electives (4 to be selected)
Students must choose 4 courses as non-specialization courses based on their interests and 
preferences. These are undergraduate courses offered at the IBA at any school and by any 
department, except those offered as accounting or ﬁnance courses (that is, except those 
offered under course codes ACCXXX, LAWXXX, and FINXXX).
At least one of the NS electives must be from courses offered by the Social Sciences 
Department. These courses are usually in the format of SSCXX, HUMXXX, HSTXXX, NSCXXX, 
MCSXXX, POLXXX, PSYXXX, or language courses.
The other three electives in this category can be any undergraduate course that is not a 
core (or equivalent) course and not an accounting or ﬁnance elective for the program. 
These courses may be those offered from any of the three schools at IBA (subject to 
fulﬁlment or prerequisites). ACF Students are not allowed to take Principles of 
Microeconomics, Principles of Macroeconomics, Principles of Management, or 
Organizational Behavior as NS electives. The list of course offerings differ semester to 
semester and students can ﬁnd the current offerings on the relevant website or with the 
relevant program ofﬁces.S. No. Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Fixed Income Investments
Investment Banking
Security Analysis
Corporate Finance
Portfolio Management
Financial Risk Management
Derivatives
Treasury and Funds Management
Islamic Banking & Finance
Marketing of Financial Service
Venture Capital & Innovation in FinanceFIN424
FIN451
FIN453
FIN454
FIN455
FIN456
FIN457
FIN462
FIN463
FIN467
FIN4683
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
FIN401
-
FIN401
FIN4011
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
- 3 -Accounting
elective VAccounting
Elective1
-- 3 -Accounting
elective VIAccounting
Elective2
- 3 Finance elective VIIFinance
Elective3
- PRJ491 6 ELPExperiential
Learning
Project4Semester-8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Accounting electives compulsory for
CA and ACCA exemption
Course category
Advanced Managerial Accounting
Financial Reporting
Advanced Auditing
Advanced Financial Reporting
Corporate Law
Advanced TaxationCourse Code
ACC310
ACC315
ACC325
ACC401
LAW305
LAW40139 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Experiential learning and lifelong learning mindset
The curriculum of the BSAF program is enriched with experiential learning opportunities 
and activities aimed at developing a lifelong learning mindset. In addition to the personal 
effectiveness seminar series, many courses include guest speaker sessions from industry 
experts. Some courses also include formal corporate visits like the visit to Pakistan Stock 
Exchange in an undergraduate core course ‘Financial Institutions and Markets’.
Internships
To provide students with an early exposure to the business world, a formal corporate 
internship must be carried out after completing the 6th semester (i.e. after completion of 
all the courses till 6th semester). However, students joining from the spring semester can 
be provided an exception to carry out their corporate internships during the subsequent 
summer after their 5th semester. These internships are a mandatory requirement for 
graduation. Career Development Center at IBA coordinates the necessary requirements for 
the internship:
Experiential Learning Project (ELP)
The experiential Learning Project (ELP) is a mandatory and concluding part of the BSAF 
program. It is a semester-long project in a corporate entity, an on-the-job training in a real 
business environment. The ELP allows the students to network with their future employers 
and introduces them to the challenges of the real business world. The project is equivalent 
to 6 credit hours and the grade is also included in the CGPA of the students. Detailed 
requirements of the ELP program are available from the program coordinator ofﬁce and 
are provided to the students during their seventh semester. For more information: 
https://elp.iba.edu.pk/.
Positive societal impact
Ethical mindset and societal considerations are infused in the BSAF curriculum through 
various avenues including course embedded topics such as the Code of Ethics is part of the 
curriculum in the courses related to Accounting and Auditing, term projects, and social 
internship.Social internship program
In undergraduate programs, social internship (called the Responsible Citizen Initiative) is a 
mandatory requirement for completing the learning cycle. Students are required to work 
in Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) or a social enterprise for a period of four to six 
weeks to get exposure to social problems and contribute at the ground level.
This internship can be carried out after the 1st year of studies / 2nd semester and must be 
completed by the end of the 3rd year of studies / 6th semester. Career Development Center 
at IBA coordinates the necessary requirements for the internship.
Use of technology and innovative pedagogy
The curriculum encourages use of the latest technology applications in its courses related 
to different business functions. These emerging technologies are continuously identiﬁed 
through market trends and are made part of the curricula after certain deliberations 
through the course review process. Some courses in the BSAF program integrating 
software teaching include Financial Management, Financial Modelling (Advanced Excel), 
Accounting Information System with SAP (SAP) and Financial Econometrics (E views).
Another way the program fosters technological exposure to its students is through the 
integration of technology into pedagogy. The use of games and simulations, course 
projects, video case studies and blended learning (online courses like Coursera) require 
students to keep in constant touch with recent technology platforms.
40 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Business Administration (MBA)
MBA is IBA’s ﬂagship program offered in both morning and evening modalities. 
Through this program, students will develop a range of analytical, conceptual, 
and operational skills that can address the many challenges in industries and 
society. The program attracts talented students through a competitive process 
and facilitates their transformation into responsible business leaders. Our MBA 
graduates are trained to think critically and to work with ethical integrity. The 
MBA faculty using state of the art technology and pedagogies fosters this 
learning environment through the creation, acquisition, dissemination, and 
application of new knowledge related to business administration.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
MBA Morning
The MBA Morning is a full-time program of 2 years duration. Students may 
choose from specializations in Marketing, Finance, Human Resource 
Management, and Supply Chain Management.
MBA Evening
The MBA Evening is offered to part-time (working) students. Students may 
choose from specializations in Marketing, Finance, Human Resource 
Management, and Supply Chain Management. The duration of this program (3.5 
years) may vary depending on the capacity of the student to complete the 
course load during each semester. Classes are held in the evenings on weekdays.
Program learning competencies
1. Advanced communication skills
 Students will develop the ability to communicate effectively while 
presenting/defending business ideas and decisions.
2. Advanced Knowledge and research capability 
 Students will develop the ability to apply advanced knowledge of major 
business disciplines for problem-solving and decision making.
3. Critical Thinking 
 Students will develop the ability to analyze a complex business situation to 
reach a diagnosis and prescribe resolution strategies.4. Ethical awareness 
 Students will develop ethical understanding in a business setting.
5. Global mindset 
 Students will develop an appreciation of diversity in business practices, both 
locally and globally.
*Approximate only; actual duration varies based on the course load.
**Corporate internship is mandatory for  students  coming  from  non-BBA  academic backgrounds.
***Personal effectiveness program consists of 5 sessions delivered by industry professionals.
BOP is based on the essential topics 
for the subjects of Accounting, 
Finance, Marketing, and 
Management. 4-6 weeks programDuration Business Orientation Program Program structure
-2 years (MBA Morning)
3.5 years (MBA Evening)*Time for completion -
4-6 weeks -Business Orientation
Program (BOP)
13 39** Core courses
5 15 Elective courses
1 6 MBA Project
18 + 1 project 60 Total
1 (only for MBA Morning) -Corporate internship
(6-8 weeks) **
1 (only for MBA Morning) -Personal effectiveness
program*** (10 hours)Credit
hours41 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
PRJ702 6 - MBA Project - Final FYP
9A minimum of three courses
from electivesElective
- 15 Total credit hours -Semester-4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Important Note:
* Students are required to follow their program's semester-wise sequence of courses.
MBA Morning students (except those taking retakes) are required to complete their core 
courses in the morning program.Semester-wise sequence of courses - MBA Morning
ACC506 3 -Financial Accounting and
Information SystemsCore
-FIN506 3 - Business Finance I Core
MGTxxx 3 Managerial Economics Core
- MGT557 3Organizational Behavior
and LeadershipCore
- MKT501 3 Marketing Management Core
15 Total credit hoursSemester-1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ACC505 3 ACC506Accounting for
Decision MakingCore
MGTxxxFIN507 3 FIN506 Business Finance II Core
MGTxxx 3Business, Government, and
the International Economy (BGIE)Core
FIN506 MGT510 Core 3Operations and Production
Management
15 Total credit hoursSemester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
FIN506 
MKT501 
MGT557FINxxx Core 3 Data Analytics6-8 weeks Corporate Internship
(before 3rd semester)
MGTxxx 3 - Business Ethics Core
ACC505
FIN507
MGTxxx
MGT510
FinxxxMKT505 3MKT501
FINxxxAdvanced &
Applied Business ResearchCore
MGT506 3 Corporate Strategy* Core
-
- PRJ701 0 MBA Project - Non-Credit FYP
- - Elective 6A minimum of two courses
from electives
- - 15 Total credit hoursSemester-3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type42 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
MGT506 3ACC505
FIN507
MGTxxx
MGT510
FinxxxCorporate Strategy* Core
- 6 -A minimum of two courses
from electivesElective
9 Total credit hoursSemester-5Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
PRJ701 0 - MBA Project - Non-Credit FYP
9 -A minimum of three courses
from electivesElective
9 Total credit hoursSemester-6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Important Note:
* Students are required to follow their program's semester-wise sequence of courses.
** MBA Evening students (except those taking retakes) are required to complete their 
core courses in the evening program.Semester-wise sequence of courses - MBA Evening
FINxxx 3 - Data Analytics Core
FIN506
MKT501
MGT557FIN507 3 FIN506 Business Finance II Core
MGT510 3Operations and
Production ManagementCore
9 Total credit hoursSemester-3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeMGTxxx 3 -Business, Government, and
the International Economy (BGIE)Core
-MKT501 3 - Marketing Management Core
ACC505 3Accounting for
Decision MakingCore
9 Total credit hoursSemester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeACC506 3 -Financial Accounting and
Information SystemsCore
-FIN506 3 - Business Finance I Core
MGTxxx 3 Managerial Economics Core
9 Total credit hoursSemester-1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type MGTxxx 3 - Business Ethics Core
MKT501
FINxxxMGT557 3 -Organizational Behavior
and LeadershipCore
MKT505 3Advanced & Applied
Business ResearchCore
9 Total credit hoursSemester-4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
PRJ702 6 - MBA Project - Final FYP
6 Total credit hoursSemester-7Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeElective courses
Students can select 5 courses as electives. These may be selected from any of the 
courses offered by the School of Business Studies (SBS) that are not core courses 
for the MBA program. These elective courses, therefore, include courses offered 
by the Finance department (usually course codes beginning with FIN), 
Accounting and Law department (beginning with ACC and LAW), Marketing 
department (usually beginning with MKT) and the Management department 
(usually beginning with MGT, HRM, ENT, and SCM); subject to fulﬁllment of 
pre-requisites. The list of course offerings differ from semester to semester and 
students can ﬁnd the current offerings on the website or with the relevant 
program ofﬁces.
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Accounting Information System with SAP
Auditing Theory and Practice
IFRS and Financial Reporting in Pakistan
Analysis of Financial Statements
Project Evaluation and Financing
International Field Project
Introduction to Ethics and Moral Philosophy
International Trade
Public Policy Analysis: Theory and Practice
Environmental and Resource Economics
Financial Economics
Monetary Economics
Water Economics and Policy
Microeconomics of Policy Analysis
Financial Intermediation
The Strategic Management of Banks
International Finance
Investment Banking and Financial Services
Security Analysis and Capital Markets
Regulation and Financial Markets
Advanced Corporate Finance
Advanced Portfolio Management
Treasury and Fund Management
Risk Management
Derivatives and Risk Hedging
Financial Econometrics
Islamic FinanceACC507
ACC557
ACC559
ACC561
ACC589
BUS551
BUS553
ECO539
ECO560
ECO561
ECO562
ECO566
ECO574
ECO575
FIN531
FIN541
FIN551
FIN554
FIN556
FIN558
FIN560
FIN563
FIN565
FIN567
FIN568
FIN569
FIN5703
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3ACC506
ACC506
ACC506
ACC506
ACC506
-
-
ECO501
ECO501
ECO501
ECO501
ECO501
ECO501
ECO501
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN506, MTS509
FIN506Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Financial Modelling
Fixed Income Securities
Behavioural Finance
People Analytics
Organizational Development
Team Management
Leading and Managing Change Process
Performance and Compensation Management
Developing Human Capital
Corporate Governance and Practices in Pakistan
International Market Entry Strategies
International Business
Alternative Management
Technology Innovation Management and Design
Branding and Creative Corporate Communication
Food Products Marketing
Advanced Marketing Communication
Applied Buying Behaviour
Social Marketing
Advanced Brand Management
Digital Marketing
Media Management
Social Media Marketing
Marketing Analytics
Trade Marketing
New Product Development
Green Marketing and Sustainability
Growth Marketing for Technology Enabled Companies
E-Commerce & Its Application
Retail Management
Personal Selling
Sales Management
Services Marketing
Strategic Marketing
Advanced B2B Marketing
Global Marketing Management
Neuro Marketing
Business Analysis and Decision Making
Business Analytics
Dynamics Of Distribution & Logistics
Supply Chain Management
Strategic Sourcing and Procurement
Strategic Sourcing and Negotiation SkillsFIN574
FIN594
FIN598
HRM530
HRM552
HRM557
HRM558
HRM562
HRM571
LAW553
MGT558
MGT559
MGT560
MGT561
MKT506
MKT550
MKT551
MKT552
MKT556
MKT561
MKT563
MKT566
MKT569
MKT574
MKT576
MKT578
MKT579
MKT580
MKT583
MKT586
MKT651
MKT653
MKT656
MKT657
MKT658
MKT659
MKT660
MTS500
MTS501
SCM557
SCM559
SCM570
SCM5713
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
MGT557
MGT557
MGT557
MGT557
MGT557
MGT557
LAW501
-
-
-
-
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501, MTS509,
MTS510
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
-
MKT503, MKT507
MKT503, MKT507
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT50144 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Experiential learning and lifelong learning mindset
The curriculum of the MBA Program is enriched with experiential learning opportunities. 
The personal effectiveness program consists of 5 interactive sessions delivered by industry 
professionals on topics including interpersonal skills, career talk, work practices, and ethics. 
Furthermore, guest lectures, ﬁeld trips, games and simulations, and term projects are also 
included for experiential learning.
The students are also exposed to various activities to develop a lifelong learning mindset. 
With faculty mentoring, they are encouraged to participate in industry challenges, 
competitions, and activities to further develop a learning mindset.
MBA Project
The mandatory MBA Project serves as a tool for experiential learning as it involves data 
collection and detailed analysis of a speciﬁc industry-related issue and presentation of 
analysis with solutions/ recommendations. Students must engage with the industry and a 
faculty mentor to complete the project.
Corporate internship
MBA morning students must undertake a mandatory 6 – 8-week corporate internship. This 
provides them with exposure to apply their learning in an actual work environment.
Positive societal impact
As part of the IBA-SBS Mission, social enlightenment broadly and ethics speciﬁcally is an 
essential element of the MBA program. It is infused in various courses in the form of explicit 
topics or part of pedagogy, such as case studies, to discuss the ethical implications. Also, 
some courses including, ‘Organizational Behavior and Leadership’, ‘Corporate Strategy’ and 
'Business Ethics’ focus on this component at a higher level. The Code of Ethics is also part 
of the curriculum in the courses related to Accounting and Auditing.
Use of technology and innovative pedagogy
IBA-SBS supports and encourages the use of innovative pedagogical tools by faculty 
through various faculty training sessions and ensuring access to such resources. For 
example, IBA-SBS has access to Harvard Business Publishing and uses Harvard cases and 
simulations in various courses. Many courses at the MBA level use case studies in pedagogy 
to embed the application of concepts in real-life scenarios.
The MBA program also incorporates software in student learning including SPSS, NVivo, 
AMOS, SAP, and Advanced Excel.
45 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Executive Master of Business 
Administration (EMBA)
The Executive MBA program, offered by IBA-SBS, is designed speciﬁcally for 
working professionals and spans a duration of 72 credit hours over weekends. It 
presents a distinctive chance for professionals to enhance their expertise and 
capabilities while maintaining their job responsibilities. The program can 
typically be ﬁnished within a span of approximately 3 years, depending on the 
number of courses undertaken by each student.
This program caters to professionals aspiring to assume leadership positions and 
strive for the top echelons of the corporate hierarchy, particularly within the 
C-suite (CEO, CFO, and COO) or entrepreneurial roles. The program's structure, 
curriculum, approach, and material are meticulously crafted in collaboration with 
renowned experts and seasoned faculty members.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Class schedule  
The class schedule is planned to cater to the convenience of students, mainly 
scheduled on weekends. Regular classes, with a full course load are conducted from 
2:00 p.m. to 9:15 p.m. on Saturdays and from 9:30 a.m. to 5:15 p.m. on Sundays. 
However, students have the ﬂexibility to adjust their course workload according to 
their preferences, allowing them to minimize their commitments if desired.
Program learning  competencies
1. Advanced communication skills
 Students will develop the ability to communicate effectively while 
presenting/defending business ideas and decisions.
2. Advanced knowledge and research capability
 Students will develop the ability to apply advanced knowledge of major 
business disciplines for problem-solving and decision making.
3. Critical thinking
 Students will develop the ability to analyze a complex business situation to 
reach a diagnosis and prescribe resolution strategies.
4. Ethical awareness
 Students will develop ethical understanding in a business setting.
5.  Glocal mindset
 Students will develop an appreciation of diversity in business practices, both 
locally and globally.Program structure
Time for completion is 3 years*
Core courses
Capstone (after all core courses) 
Elective courses
Executive MBA Project
Total
*Based on full course load-
13
01
8
1
-
--
39
03
24
6
72
-Credit hours No. of courses Description 
46 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Semester-wise sequence of courses:
MTS506 3 -Quantitative Methods of
Decision MakingCore
-MKT501 3 - Marketing Management Core
ACC506 3Financial Accounting and 
Information SystemsCore
- FIN506 3 Business Finance – I Core
12 Total credit hoursSemester-1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO517 3 ECO501Global Economics &
Political EnvironmentCore
-- 3 - Elective 1 Elective
- 3 Elective 2 Elective
- - 3 Elective 3 Elective
12 Total credit hoursSemester-4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MGT541 3 - Corporate Strategy Elective
-- 3 - Elective 4 Elective
- 3 Elective 5 Elective
All core
courses- 6 Executive MBA Project Core
15 Total credit hoursSemester-5Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
- 3 - Elective – 6 Elective
-- 3 - Elective – 7 Elective
- 3 Elective – 8 Elective
9 Total credit hoursSemester-6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeMGT503 3 - Managerial Communications Core
-MKT505 3MTS506
MKT501 Advanced and Applied
Business ResearchCore
MGT557 3Organizational Behavior
& Leadership  Core
FIN506 FIN507 3 Business Finance II Core
12 Total credit hoursSemester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
LAW501 3 -Legal & Regulatory
Environment of BusinessCore
-ACC505 3 FIN506Accounting for
Decision MakingCore
ECO501 3 Managerial Economics Core
FIN506
MKT501
MGT557MGT510 3 Operations Management Core
12 Total credit hoursSemester-3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Important Note:
* Students are required to follow their program's semester-wise sequence of courses.47 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Elective courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Analysis of Financial Statements
Business Analytics and Decision Making
Issues in Pakistan Economy
Advance Corporate Finance
Treasury and Financial Derivatives
Corporate Investment Banking
Islamic Finance
Advance Portfolio Management
Risk Management
Financial Modeling
Recruitment and Selection Techniques
Leading the Change Process
Performance and Compensation Management
Training and Development
Corporate Governance and Practices in Pakistan
Strategic Human Resource Management
Project Evaluation and Management
Alternate Management
Mobile Marketing Strategy
Branding and Creative Corporate Communication
Advance Marketing Communication
Entrepreneurial Management
Dynamics of Distribution and Logistics
Supply Chain Management
Advance Brand Management
Digital Marketing
Integrated Marketing Management
Social Media Marketing
Strategic Sourcing and Negotiation Skills
Retailing
Services Marketing
B2B Marketing
Global Marketing ManagementACC561
MTS500
ECO544
FIN501
FIN535
FIN536
FIN559
FIN563
FIN567
FIN574
HRM530
HRM558
HRM562
HRM571
LAW553
MGT512
MGT531
MGT560
MIS553
MKT506
MKT551
MKT553
SCM557
SCM559
MKT561
MKT563
MKT564
MKT569
SCM571
MKT586
MKT656
MKT658
MKT6593
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3ACC506
-
ECO501
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
FIN507
MGT557
MGT557
MGT557
MGT557
LAW501
MGT557
-
-
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
-
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501
MKT501Experiential learning and lifelong learning mindset
The curriculum of the Executive MBA includes different avenues for experiential learning. 
Guest speaker sessions, simulation exercises, and term projects provide the opportunity to 
enhance understanding through experiential avenue of learning. Workshops, training 
sessions, networking events are also regularly arranged to develop a lifelong learning mindset.
Executive MBA Project
The mandatory Executive MBA Project serves as a tool for experiential learning as it involves 
data collection and detailed analysis of a speciﬁc industry-related issue and presentation of 
analysis with solutions/ recommendations. Students must engage with the industry and a 
faculty mentor to complete the project.
Positive societal impact
As part of the IBA-SBS Mission, social enlightenment broadly and ethics speciﬁcally is an 
important element of the Executive MBA program. It is infused in various courses in the 
form of explicit topics or part of pedagogy, such as case-studies, to discuss the ethical 
implications. Also, some courses, like ‘Legal and Regulatory Environment of Business’, 
‘Organizational Behavior and Leadership’ and ’Corporate Strategy’ focus on this 
component at a higher level. Code of Ethics is also part of the curriculum in the courses 
related to Accounting and Auditing.
Use of technology and innovative pedagogy
IBA-SBS supports and encourages the use of innovative pedagogical tools by faculty 
through various faculty training sessions and ensuring the access to such resources. Many 
courses at the Executive MBA level use case studies in pedagogy to embed the application 
of concepts in real life scenarios. The faculty has access to Harvard Business Publishing and 
uses Harvard cases, and simulations in various courses.
The Executive MBA program also incorporates software in student learning including SPSS, 
AMOS, Advanced Excel etc.
Further electives can be included based on industry demand and participants’ requirements.Master of Science (MS) Finance
The MS Finance is a 36 credit hours morning program that can be completed in 
a minimum duration of 1.5 years. The program is designed to provide a solid 
theoretical, as well as computational skillset for a successful career in the ﬁeld of 
ﬁnance. Students are prepared for challenges in the domestic and global 
ﬁnancial system by imparting comprehensive knowledge of ﬁnance and its 
multidisciplinary aspects. Students will gain an in-depth knowledge with core 
courses in corporate ﬁnance and investments, before they can streamline the 
degree, to their choice of specialization (Market Finance or Corporate Finance) 
with a range of optional courses, including a few speciﬁcally designed applied 
courses. 
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Class timings
The classes will be conducted in the evenings and on weekends.
Program learning competencies
1. Advanced knowledge of ﬁnance disciplines
 Students will gain in-depth knowledge of areas within the ﬁnance ﬁeld.
2. Critical analysis skills
 Students will develop critical thinking skills.
3. Ethical awareness
 Students will develop an awareness of ethical issues in the ﬁnance ﬁeld and 
research.
4. Plan and execute research
 Students will engage with and contribute to knowledge frontiers in the 
ﬁnance ﬁeld.Program structure
Semester-wise sequence of courses
FIN555 3 - Corporate Finance Core
-FIN569 3 - Financial Econometrics Core
FIN511 3 Investments Core
FIN555 FIN516 3Financial Analysis through
Excel and VBACore
- FIN505 Core 3Ethics and Professional
Standards in FinanceSemester-1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type48 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
* MS students can opt to take a project of 3 credit hours in place of a thesis along with an 
additional elective course to complete the mandatory credit hours. Furthermore, such 
students cannot use this MS degree to apply for a PhD program, as per HEC policy.Core courses
Elective courses
Thesis / Project
Total7
3*
1
10 + 1 thesis21
9
6
36Credit hours
FIN577 3 - Seminars in Finance Core
-FIN517 3 FIN555Financial Analysis through
Stata and RCore
- 3 Area elective 1* Elective Corea
- - 3 General elective 1 Elective CoreSemester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeExperiential learning and lifelong learning mindset
Experiential learning is embedded in the MS Finance program through 
thesis/project and various projects embedded in courses to give students an 
opportunity to interact with industry professionals, analyze and document a 
real-life problem and connect with the ﬁnancial market.
The MS Finance core courses introduce students to basic and advanced level 
ﬁnance courses along with econometrics and ﬁnancial analysis courses to 
strengthen students’ research and data analysis skills in Finance for lifelong 
learning. Students then choose their thesis or project as per the specialized area 
choice which enables them to apply the relevant research tools to analyze an 
issue in their selected area.
Finance lab
 A Finance lab is also being developed at the IBA-SBS which will give students an 
opportunity to apply their learning through various practical approaches. The 
Finance lab will provide the students with exposure to securities and 
investment analysis, and portfolio management through real-time market data.
Positive societal impact
Aligned with the IBA-SBS mission, the curriculum embeds social enlightenment 
and ethics at the core of learning. Most courses include a topic on ethical 
perspective and conduct and projects are also required to have a necessary 
component of ethical implications. Moreover, the students are encouraged to 
pick a topic for their thesis/ project with a positive societal impact and include 
ethical perspectives in their research work.
Use of technology and innovative pedagogy
The MS Finance program incorporates software in student learning including 
Advanced Excel, VBA, Stata, R, Python etc. Apart from this, workshops, and 
multiple training sessions on new software are organized for graduate students 
to support in their research endeavors.Elective coursesImportant Note:
*Students can opt for specialization in the ﬁelds of Corporate Finance or Market Finance.
- - - Area elective 2 Elective Core
- - - Thesis/project -Semester-3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Corporate Finance
Mergers and Acquisitions
Project Finance and Public Private Infrastructure
International Finance
Applied Security Analysis and Financial ModellingFIN577
FIN555
FIN551
FIN562FIN555
FIN555
FIN555
FIN5551.5
1.5
3
3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse title
1
2
3
4S.No
Market Finance
Empirical Asset Pricing
Derivatives and Risk Hedging
Mathematical Finance
Treasury and Fund ManagementFIN575
FIN568
FIN578
FIN565FIN511/FIN516
FIN555
FIN555
FIN5553
3
3
3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse title
1
2
3
4S.No
General electives
Fintech and Financial Innovation
Behavioral Finance
Islamic Finance
Risk Management
Advanced Econometrics
Python for FinanceFIN580
FIN598
FIN559
FIN562
STA672
FIN582FFIN555
FIN555
FIN555
FIN555
FIN569
FIN5553
3
3
3
3
3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse title
1
2
3
4
5
6S.No50 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS)
Islamic Banking and Finance
The MS Islamic Banking and Finance (MS IBF) is a 42 credit hours program which 
can be completed in a minimum duration of 1.5 years. It is offered for fresh 
graduates from business and other disciplines, experienced practitioners as well 
as Shariah scholars. The program is designed to meet the growing needs of the 
Islamic Finance industry by providing theoretical and applied knowledge of 
Islamic Finance, Islamic Jurisprudence, Banking and Economics. Graduates of 
the program will have promising career prospects in academia and in the local 
and international Islamic Finance industry. The MS IBF program is offered to both 
full-time and part-time (working) students.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Class timings
The classes will be conducted in the evening and on weekends.
Program learning competencies
1. Advanced knowledge of Islamic ﬁnance disciplines
 Students will gain in-depth knowledge of areas within the Islamic ﬁnance ﬁeld.
2. Critical analysis skills
 Students will develop critical thinking skills.
3. Ethical awareness
 Students will develop an awareness of ethical issues in the Islamic ﬁnance 
ﬁeld and research.
4. Plan and execute research
 Students will engage with and contribute to knowledge frontiers in the 
Islamic ﬁnance ﬁeld.Program structure
* MS students can opt to take a project  of 3 credit hours in place of a  thesis along 
with an additional elective course to complete the mandatory credit hours.Core courses
Elective courses
Thesis / Project
Total9
3*
1
12 + 1 thesis27
9
6
42Credit hoursElective courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Islamic Insurance (Takaful)
Investment Banking and Structuring Financial Requirements
International Finance
Islamic Law of Contracts
Islamic Treasury Operations
Islamic Partnership Corporate and Securities Law
Islamic Wealth Planning and Management
Islamic Portfolio Management
Financial Services Marketing
Shariah Issues in Islamic Finance
Commercial Law and Legal Documentation for Islamic Financial Services
Islamic Entrepreneurship
Advanced Econometrics
Ethics and Corporate Governance
Risk Management for IFIsFIN512
FIN550
FIN551
FIN572
FIN651
-
FIN579
-
MKT575
FIN555
FIN654
FIN652
FIN581
BUS554
FIN5783
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
-
FIN510
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
FIN514
-
-
Important note
*Thesis is of 6 credit hours and project is of 3 credit hours.
MS IBF students may take up to 2 Finance related electives offered for other degree 
programs at IBA.Semester-wise sequence of courses:
- 6/3* ECO536 Thesis/projectThesis/
ProjectSemester-4 (Spring)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeExperiential learning and lifelong learning mindset 
As a mandatory degree requirement, students are required to work on a thesis or project 
where they study a certain issue in detail, collect primary and secondary data to analyze the 
issue and produce recommendations. Working on these projects entails a high level of 
involvement of the faculty with the students. Students choose their thesis or project as per the 
specialized area of choice which enables them to apply the relevant research tools to analyze 
an issue in their selected area.
Inculcating a lifelong learning mindset, students also get a chance to work as research 
assistants on various faculty-led research and consultancy projects. They are also encouraged 
to participate in conferences and seminars with faculty mentoring. Last year, the 3rd World 
Islamic Finance Forum (WIFF) 2022 was conducted by the IBA Centre for Excellence in Islamic 
Finance (CEIF) with local and global participation.
Positive societal impact
As a positive impact on society is one of the elements of IBA-SBS’s mission statement, it is thus 
infused throughout the MS IBF program. Students are encouraged to choose research topics 
that bring positive societal change. Some of the recent thesis topics include Islamic Finance 
Products for Agricultural Financing, Women Empowerment and Islamic Finance, and Islamic 
Monetary Policy, and its impacts. In the MS IBF program, understanding Ethical Awareness 
and Islamic Banking and Finance Principles as applied in different countries, regions, markets, 
jurisdictions, and their impact on businesses and governments, is an important learning topic 
that has ethics at its core.
Use of  technology and innovative pedagogy
The MS IBF program incorporates software in student learning including Advanced Excel, Strata, 
E-views, and Data Stream. Apart from this, workshops, and training sessions on new software 
are organized for graduate students to provide them with support in their research endeavors.ECO509 3 - Business Economics Core
-ECO536 3 -Research Methodology in
Economics and FinanceCore
FIN508 3 Islamic Jurisprudence Core
- FIN510 3 Financial Management CoreSemester-1 (Fall)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO510 3 - Islamic Economics Core
FIN508FIN513 3 FIN510 Corporate Finance Core
FIN559 3 Islamic Finance Core
- - 3 Elective-I ElectiveSemester-2 (Spring)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ACC504 3 FIN508Accounting and Auditing
for Islamic FinanceCore
-FIN511 3 - Islamic Capital Markets Core
- 3 Elective-II Elective
- - 3 Elective-III ElectiveSemester-3 (Fall)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type52 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Management
The MS Management is a 36 credit hours morning program that can be 
completed in a minimum duration of 1.5 years. The program is designed to 
prepare students for quality research and analysis in the ﬁeld of Management. A 
sound theoretical basis is provided in the general area of Management and in the 
specialized areas of Strategy and Organization and Operations Management. 
This is complemented by developing research skills through both qualitative and 
quantitative methods. Students are introduced to various approaches, tools and 
techniques in research methods which enable them to engage with 
management-related issues in a scientiﬁc manner. The MS Management 
program is offered to both full-time students and part-time (working) students.  
Eligibility criteria 
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 . 
 
Class timings 
The classes will be conducted in the morning/daytime. 
 
Program learning competencies 
 1. Advanced knowledge of management disciplines 
 Students will gain in-depth knowledge of areas within the management 
ﬁeld. 
 
 2. Critical analysis skills 
 Students will develop critical thinking skills. 
 
 3. Ethical awareness 
 Students will develop awareness of ethical issues in the management ﬁeld 
and research. 
 
4. Plan and execute research 
 Students will engage with and contribute to knowledge frontiers in the 
management ﬁeld. 
Program structure
Foundation courses* 
Core courses 
Elective courses 
Thesis / Project 
Total 5 
6 
4** 
1 
10 + 1 thesis --- 
18 
12 
6 
36 Credit hours
Foundation courses* Students with non-business academic backgrounds will have to take 
foundation-level courses which may require them to spend an extra semester in the 
MS program. 
** MS students can opt to take the project of 3 credit hours in place of a thesis along 
with an additional elective course to complete the mandatory credit hours. 
Introduction to Economics
Principles of Accounting 
Introduction to Business Finance 
Principles of Marketing
Introduction to Statistics1
2
3
4
5 ECO105
ACC111
FIN201
MKT201
MTS1023
3
3
3
3Credit hours Course code S. No Foundation courses
Note: Foundation courses are for students with non-business academic backgrounds.53 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Important note
*Thesis is of 6 credit hours and the project is of 3 credit hours. 
Students opting for a project must take an additional elective of 3 credit hours.Semester-wise sequence of courses
- 3 - Elective 3 Elective
-- 3 - Elective 4 Elective
- 6/3* Thesis/project Thesis/ProjectSemester-3 (Fall)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeElective courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Business Analytics 
Innovation and Design 
Modeling and Simulation 
Supply and Demand Management 
Quality Management 
Organization Theory 
Research Seminar in International Management 
Research in Organizational Behavior 
Organizational Network Analysis 
Pedagogy for Management 
Concepts in Entrepreneurship 
Managing Social Entrepreneurship 
Alternative Management and Organization 
Advanced Entrepreneurship 
Project ManagementBUS501 
MGT605 
MGT574 
MGT528 
MGT575 
MGT603 
MGT604 
MGT572 
--- 
MGT576 
MGT520 
MGT577 
MGT573 
MGT527 
MGT555 3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
-
-
-
MGT511 
MGT511 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
MGT520 
-
Experiential learning and lifelong learning mindset 
The core courses in the MS Management program introduce the students to various 
management and organization theories, research methodologies, and topics in strategy, and 
operations management. Students then choose their thesis or project and apply the relevant 
research tools to analyze an issue in their selected area.
Inculcating a lifelong learning mindset, students also get a chance to work as research 
assistants on various faculty-led research and consultancy projects. They are also encouraged 
to participate in conferences and seminars with faculty mentoring. 
Positive societal impact 
Ethics is infused in various courses in the form of explicit topics or part of pedagogy, to discuss 
the ethical implications such as in the course Philosophy of Management and Organization. 
Students are also encouraged to choose a topic for their MS thesis/ project which can bring 
positive societal change. 
Use of technology and innovative pedagogy 
The MS Management program incorporates software in student learning including SPSS, 
Stata, AMOS, NVivo. Apart from this, workshops, and training sessions on new software are 
organized for graduate students to support in their research endeavors.MGT515 3 -Research & Practice of
Operations Management Core
-MGT511 3 -Foundations of Management
& Organization Core
MGT601 3Organizational Research
Method Core
- 3 Elective I ElectiveSemester-1 (Fall) Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MGT514 3 MGT511Philosophy of Management
and Organization Core
-MGT602 3 MGT511 Research Seminar in Strategy Core
MGT523/
MGT 5243Qualitative/Quantitative
Research Methods Core
3 Elective II ElectiveSemester-2 (Spring)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type54 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Marketing
The MS Marketing is a 30 credit hours morning program which can be 
completed in a minimum duration of 1.5 years. The degree will engage the 
students in a manner that takes a pragmatic and applied approach to learning, 
enabling them to solve business problems realistically and identify opportunities 
and challenges while working in teams. The cornerstone of the program is to be 
an application of the marketing concepts; encapsulate the existing and 
upcoming trends; incorporate the mandatory ultra-modern tools and 
techniques needed by marketing professionals to be successful in the local and 
global market; and empower the graduates to make decisions which will 
resonate with the needs of the organization and match the job key deliverables.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Class timings
The classes will be conducted in the morning/daytime.
Program Objectives and Learning Outcomes
The cornerstone of the program is:
 Be an application of the marketing concepts.
 Encapsulate the existing and upcoming trends.
 Incorporate the mandatory ultra-modern tools and techniques needed by 
marketing professionals to be successful in the local and global markets.
  Empower the graduates to make decisions that will resonate with the needs 
of the organization and match the job key deliverables.
 Program structure
Foundation courses* 6
6
1**
1
7 + 1 thesis18
3
9
30Core courses
Elective courses
Thesis / Project
TotalDepends on
the student’s
requirementCredit hours
*NOTE: The course load will be minimum of 2 courses per semester *The students will 
have to complete 12 credits hours of either 2 electives + 6 credit hours of research project 
OR 1 elective + 9 credit hours of research-based thesis to complete the requirement of 30 
credit hours
Students with non-business academic background will have to take foundation level 
courses which may require them to spend an extra semester in the MS program.
** MS students can opt to take a project of 6 credit hours in place of thesis along with an 
additional elective course to complete the mandatory credit hours.55 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
*Thesis is of 9 credit hours and project is of 6 credit hours- 9/6* - Thesis/ Project Thesis/ProjectSemester-3 (Fall)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeExperiential learning and lifelong learning mindset
The core courses in the MS Marketing program introduce the students to various marketing 
theories, consumer insights, and research methodologies. Students can then choose their 
thesis or research project which enables them to apply the relevant research tools to analyze 
an issue in their selected area, giving exposure to experiential learning and lifelong learning 
mindset.
 Neuromarketing lab
 The neuromarketing lab provides students an opportunity to learn and observe the 
effects of stimuli through eye tracking, skin response, and facial response sensors. The 
purpose of the neuromarketing lab is to advance knowledge and understanding of 
neuromarketing and behavioral research.Foundation courses
Marketing Issues in Pakistan
Principles of Marketing
Brand Management
Consumer Behavior1
2
3
4MKT401
MKT201
MKT561
MKT5523
3
3
3Credit hours Course code S. No Foundation courses
Elective courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Social Media Analytics
Business to Business Marketing and Channel strategy
Sustainable Marketing
Neuro Marketing
Advertising and Society
Retail Analytics-
-
-
MKT660
-
-3
3
3
3
3
3-
-
-
-
-
-Semester-wise sequence of courses
MKT601 3 - Marketing Strategy Core
-MKT562 3 - Seminar in Marketing Theory Core
MKT602 3 Consumer Insights Core
- - 3 Elective I ElectiveSemester-1 (Fall) Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MKT560 3 - Research Philosophies Core
-
- -MKT584 3 -Advanced Qualitative
ResearchCore
MKT607 3Advanced Quantitative
ResearchCore
3 Elective II ElectiveSemester-2 (Spring)Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeSCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
(SESS)56 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-2457 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
The School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS) is an amalgamation of two departments, two research centers and three labs. Therefore, SESS includes the Department of Economics, the 
Department of Social Sciences and Liberal Arts (SSLA), the Center for Business and Economic Research (CBER), the Population Research Center (PRC), the Social Inequality Lab, Economic Growth and 
Forecasting Lab, Psychology Research and Testing Lab, and Karachi Urban Lab (KUL).
Distinguishing SESS features are as following: 
 Over 1,000 students are currently enrolled, fostering a vibrant and engaging campus community. 
 48:52 male-female student ratio, promoting a diverse and inclusive learning environment.  
 45+ PhD faculty members, contributing to academic excellence. 
 Research seminars with world-leading institutions to promote intellectual growth and collaboration. 
 Exchange program opportunities for students allowing them to study abroad. 
 Research grants for students to support innovative research initiatives. 
 Variety of social events and vibrant campus life. 
 1,200+ alumni community around the globe, spanning the US, Germany, Turkey, the UK, Saudi Arabia, Canada, UAE, Australia, Europe, Africa, Hong Kong, and Japan. 
 Over 250 alumni have pursued further education after graduation, many being the recipients of the Fulbright, Erasmus, DAAD, Chevening, and other prestigious scholarships. School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS)
The establishment of the School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS) in 2021 was an exciting time for the faculty, students, and researchers at IBA. During the journey of two 
years, I am proud to share that we have progressed in establishing the governance system of the school, special initiatives to enhance the research capacity, and teaching excellence. 
All programs in Economics and Liberal Arts are led by highly qualiﬁed and seasoned faculty. Our curriculum and the school’s scholarly environment encourage students to develop 
themselves as effective practitioners and scholars. The plethora of courses offered at the SESS allows students to develop comprehensive skills in reading, writing, quantitative 
thinking, and research, thereby preparing students for various career paths and life-long learning.
The research conducted by SESS is on diverse topics. The Economics department is involved in impactful research on corporate governance, bonds and stock markets, economic 
growth, institutions, political economy, and sustainable development. Similarly, the Social Sciences and Liberal Arts department is ingrained in cutting-edge research on climate 
change, gender, urbanization, tourism, human behavior, and social psychology. One of our top goals is to include our students in research endeavors to provide them with pathways 
to successful careers.
Finally, I welcome you all to join us in our endeavors to address some of society's most pressing challenges through research and academic excellence.Dean’s Message
Department of Economics
The Department enables its students to learn theory, empirical investigation and policy analysis. The 
classroom and on-campus experience help the students to be trained as modern-day Economists, 
Researchers, Policy Analysts, and Academics in national and international institutions. Visit the  
website: https://economics.iba.edu.pk/.
Department of Social Sciences and Liberal Arts
The Department adopts a multidisciplinary approach by offering majors in Psychology, Political Science, 
Media and Culture, and History. The students learn through theoretical and experiential knowledge. Visit 
website: https://ssla.iba.edu.pk/.
Center for Business and Economic Research (CBER)
CBER is the research wing of the School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS), IBA Karachi. It serves 
as a platform for researchers to work with the private, public, and non-proﬁt sectors across different 
disciplines of social sciences and public policy. Its placement within the schools allows it to collaborate 
with faculty in diverse areas of specialization.
o Carry out rigorous impact evaluation research studies, consultancy assignments, and sponsored 
research work for national and international agencies.o Publish a ﬂagship yearly state of the economy report and annual international conference of the 
School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS), IBA Karachi; Conference on Tourism Sustainability in 
the Global South in May 2023 in Karachi.
o Conduct training workshops for students and faculty.
o Distinguished Lecture Series, Brown Bag Seminar Series, fund student research projects.
Visit the website: https://cber.iba.edu.pk.
Population Research Center (PRC)
The Population Research Center (PRC), established at the IBA in collaboration with the Population 
Council Pakistan, aspires to offer a world-class platform for conducting targeted and in-depth research 
on population-related issues. The PRC's primary objective is to provide high-quality research on 
population matters and to undertake public outreach programs aimed at raising awareness and 
improving policymaking for a stable, healthy society.
Highlights:
• Population Research Conference 2023.
• Young Researchers’ Workshop Series Workshop on PSLM Data Analysis and DHS Data Analysis
• Population Bulletins highlighting various aspects of Demography.
Visit the website: https://prc.iba.edu.pk.Overview of departments
Dr. Asma HyderBachelor of Science (BS) Economics
Bachelor of Science (BS) Economics program is a 4-year degree program 
designed to give students a solid foundation in Economics. The program 
provides a well-coordinated curriculum and prepares the students for entry level 
positions in private and public sector corporations, development organizations, 
banks, education, and research organizations. A wide range of courses offered in 
this program give students ample opportunities to broaden their knowledge 
base. The Economics research project in the ﬁnal year enables students to apply 
the quantitative tools learned during the program to the economic and ﬁnancial 
problems in the public and private sectors.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .Semester-wise sequence of courses
ECO103 3 - Principles of Microeconomics 1Economics
Core
-MIS103 3 -Introduction to Computer
Applications2Non
Specialization 
Core
MTS102
SSC1013 Introduction to Statistics 3Supporting
Core
- 3 Critical Reading and Writing 4University
Core
SSC151 - 3 Pakistan History 5University
Core
MTS105 - 3 College Algebra* 6 -Semester 1 FreshmanCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO104 3 - Principles of Macroeconomics 1Economics
Core
-HUM201 3 - Speech Communication 2University
Core
MTS101
SSC301/
HUM3573 Calculus I 3Supporting
Core
- 3Islamic Scholarly Tradition/
Philosophy, Logic and
Ethics (PLE)**4University
Core
- - 3 Non-specialization elective I 5Non
Specialization 
ElectiveSemester 2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO201 3 ECO103 Intermediate Microeconomics 1Economics
Core
ECO202 3 ECO104 Intermediate Macroeconomics 2Economics
Core
MTS203 3 MTS101 Linear Algebra 3Supporting
Core
MTS232 3 MTS101 Calculus II 4Supporting
Core
- 3 - Non-specialization elective II 5Non
Specialization 
ElectiveSemester 3 SophomoreCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type58 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
4 years
8
40
1
126
1
1
1Duration
Semesters
Courses
Final Year Project in Economics
Total credit hours (40 courses and 1 project)
Personal Effectiveness (non-credit short course)
Responsible Citizen Initiative (Social Internship)
Corporate InternshipCurriculum structure
12
50
12
15
33
4
126University Core Courses
Economics Core Courses
Economics Elective Courses
Supporting Core Courses (3 Mathematics and 2 Statistics) 
Non-specialization Courses (3 core + 8 elective)
Final Year Project in Economics
Total4
16
4
5
11
1
41Course category Courses Credit hoursRequired courses* College Algebra is a non-credit course and is offered only for those students who do not have a 
Mathematics background. Students will not be required to pay the fees for this course. 
**All Muslim students are required to register for SEPI. Non-Muslim students may take either SEPI or 
PLE.
***Personal Effectiveness will be offered in either the 5th or 6th  semester. This is a non-credit course and 
is a part of the graduation requirement. It consists of ﬁve 2-hour workshops distributed over the whole 
semester.
Note: 
• Students should complete their Responsible Citizen Initiative (Social Internship) after completing 
their 2nd semester at IBA and must fulﬁll this graduation requirement before the end of their 6th 
semester. 
• Students should engage in their corporate internship after completing their 6th semester of the 
coursework, preferably during the summer break.ECO312 3 ECO201 Microeconomic Theory 1Economics
Core
MTS101ECO313 3 ECO202 Macroeconomic Theory 2Economics
Core
ECO303
MTS1113 Mathematical Economics 3Economics
Core
- 3 Essential Software 4Non
Specialization
Core
MTS202 MTS102 3 Statistical Inferences 5Supporting
CoreSemester 4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO404 3 EOC104Contemporary Issues in
Global Economics1Economics
Core
-ECO 3 - Economics elective III 2Economics
Elective
ECO
-3 Economics elective IV 3Economics
Elective
- 3 Non-specialization elective VII 4Non
Specialization 
Elective
- - 3 Non-specialization elective VIII 5Non
Specialization 
ElectiveSemester 8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeECO301 3 ECO104 Development Economics 1Economics
Core
-ECO467 3 ECO104 History of Economic Thought 2Economics
Core
ECO
ECO3 Economics elective I 3Economics
Elective
- 3 Economics elective II 4Economics
Elective
- - 3 Non-specialization elective VI 5Non
Specialization 
Elective
ECO411 - 4 Final Year Project in Economics 6 ProjectSemester 7 SeniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO343 4 MTS202 Applied Econometrics I 1Economics
Core
-ECO304 3MTS111, 
MTS202Data Analytics for Economists 2Economics
Core
SSC236
-3 Introduction to Academic Writing 3Non
Specialization
Core
- 3 Non-specialization elective III 4Non
Specialization
Elective
- - 3 Non-specialization elective IV 5Non
Specialization
ElectiveSemester 5 JuniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type59 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
ECO344 4 ECO343 Applied Econometrics II 1Economics
Core
ECO203ECO411 3 ECO343 Research Methods for Economics 2Economics
Core
ECO403
ECO466/
ECO3053 Major Issues in Pakistan Economy 3Economics
Core
ECO103,
ECO1043International Trade or
International Economics4Economics
Core
- - 3 Non-specialization elective V 5Non
Specialization
Elective
SSC240 - 3 Personal Effectiveness *** 6Non
CreditSemester 6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type60 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Economics elective courses
(2 courses to be selected)
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Public Economics
Machine Learning for Economists
Public Finance
Monetary Economics
Time Series Econometrics
Climate Change Economics
International Finance
Environmental Economics
Natural Recourse and Environmental Economics
Game Theory
Health Economics
Labour Economics
Energy Economics
Energy Systems & Policy
Behavioral Economics
Modern Quantitative Methods ECO401
ECO405
ECO451
ECO452
ECO457
ECO458
ECO459
ECO450
ECO461
ECO464
ECO471
ECO472
ECO463
ECO474
ECO470
ECO4733
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3ECO201
MTS111
ECO104
ECO202
ECO343
ECO103
ECO104
ECO201
ECO201
ECO201
ECO201
ECO201
-
-
ECO103
ECO344
Non-specialization elective courses 
Students can select 8 courses from any discipline other than Economics, including 
Accounting, Finance, Marketing, Management, Social Sciences and Liberal Arts, Mathematics, 
Statistics, and Computer Science.
For further details, visit: www.economics.iba.edu.pk.
https://economics.iba.edu.pk/61 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Bachelor of Science (BS)
Economics and Mathematics 
BS Economics and Mathematics is a 4-year degree program that contains 
fundamental components of two ﬁelds of study: Economics and Mathematics. 
The program prepares the students for entry-level positions in private and public 
sectors, development organizations, banks, insurance companies, investment 
companies, education sector, and research organizations. The wide range of 
courses offered in this program gives students several opportunities to broaden 
their knowledge and expand their horizons. The research project in the ﬁnal year 
enables students to apply the quantitative tools learned in the program to 
economic and ﬁnancial problems in the public and private sectors.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .Semester-wise sequence of courses:
ECO103 3 - Principles of Microeconomics 1Economics
Core
-MTS101 3 - Calculus I 2
Non
Specialization 
CoreMathematics
Core
MTS102
SSC1013 Introduction to Statistics 3
- 3 Critical Reading and Writing 4University
Core
SSC151 - 3 Pakistan History 5University
CoreSemester 1 FreshmanCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO104 3 - Principles of Macroeconomics 1Economics
Core
MTS102MTS232 3 MTS101 Calculus II 2
Non
Specialization 
CoreMathematics
Core
MTS202
HUM2013 Statistical Inference 3
- 3 Speech Communication 4University
Core
SSC301/
HUM357- 3Islamic Scholarly Tradition/
Philosophy, Logic and
Ethics (PLE)*5University
CoreSemester 2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
University Core Courses
Economics Core Courses
Economics Electives
Mathematics Core Courses
Mathematics Electives
Non-specialization Courses (6 core and 4 electives)
Final Year Project in Economics or Mathematics
Total12
35
6
35
6
30
4
1284
11
2
11
2
10
1
41Course category Courses Credit hoursRequired coursesDuration
Semesters
Courses
Final Year Project in Economics or Mathematics
Total credit hours (40 courses and 1 project)
Personal Effectiveness (non-credit short course)
Responsible Citizen Initiative (Social Internship)
Corporate Internship4 years
8
40
1
128
1
1
1Curriculum structure62 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
ECO201 3 ECO103 Intermediate Microeconomics 1Economics
Core
-ECO202 3 ECO104 Intermediate Macroeconomics 2
Mathematics
CoreEconomics
Core
MTS211
MTS2423 Discrete Mathematics 3
MTS232 4 Multivariable Calculus 4Mathematics
Core
MTS111 - 3 Essential Software 5Non
Specialization 
CoreSemester 3 SophomoreCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO301 3 ECO104 Development Economics 1Economics
Core
-MTS436 3 MTS241 Partial Differential Equations 2
Economics
ElectiveMathematics
Core
ECO
MTS3 Economics elective I 3
- 3 Mathematics elective I 4Mathematics
Elective
- - 3 Non-specialization elective III 5Non
Specialization 
Elective 
ECO441/
MTS471- 4Final Year Economics Project or
Final Year Mathematics Project***6 ProjectSemester 7Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeECO312 3 ECO201 Microeconomic Theory 1Economics
Core
MTS101ECO313 3 ECO202 Macroeconomic Theory 2
Mathematics
CoreEconomics
Core
MTS203
MTS2313 Linear Algebra 3
MTS102 3 Probability Theory 4Non
Specialization 
Core
CSE306 - 3 Foundations to Data Science 5Non
Specialization 
CoreSemester 4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
ECO343 4 MTS202 Applied Econometrics I 1Economics
Core
MTS232MTS241 3 MTS101Introduction to
Differential Equations2
Mathematics
CoreMathematics
Core
MTS341
SSC2364 Real Analysis I 3
- 3Introduction to
Academic Writing4Non
Specialization 
Core
- - 3 Non-specialization elective I 5Non
Specialization
ElectiveSemester 5 JuniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeECO344 4 ECO343 Applied Econometrics II 1Economics
Core
MTS231ECO411 3 ECO343 Research Methods for Economics 2
Mathematics
CoreEconomics
Core
MTS304
MTS3303 Stochastic Processes 3
MTS101/
MTS2034 Optimization Techniques 4Mathematics
Core
- - 3 Non-specialization elective II 5Non
Specialization 
Elective 
SSC240 - - Personal Effectiveness ** 6 CoreSemester 6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeEconomics elective courses
(2 courses to be selected)
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Major Issues in Pakistan’s Economy
History of Economic Thought
Contemporary Issues in Global Economics
Public Economics
Machine Learning for Economists
Public Finance
Monetary Economics
Time Series Econometrics
Climate Change Economics
International Finance
Environmental Economics
Natural Recourse and Environmental economicsECO403
ECO467
ECO404
ECO401
ECO405
ECO451
ECO452
ECO457
ECO458
ECO459
ECO450
ECO4613
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3ECO203
ECO104
EOC104
ECO201
MTS111
ECO104
ECO202
ECO343
ECO103
ECO104
ECO201
ECO201Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Complex Analysis
Abstract Algebra I
Numerical Analysis
Functional Analysis I
Functional Analysis II
Abstract Algebra II
Numerical Solutions of PDE
Integral Equations
Advanced Numerical Analysis I
Advanced Numerical Analysis II
Differential Geometry
Fluid Dynamics I
Fluid Dynamics II
Financial Mathematics with a computational approach
Computational Finance
Topology I
Scientiﬁc Computing for Linear PDE’s
Modern Algebra I (Galois Theory and Application)
Modern Algebra II (Commutative Rings and Fields)
Measure Theory I
Measure Theory II
Operations Research I
Operations Research II
Introduction to Differential Topology
Financial EngineeringMTS302
MTS305
MTS306
MTS411
MTS412
MTS413
MTS431
MTS432
MTS433
MTS434
MTS435
MTS437
MTS438
MTS441
MTS442
MTS451
MTS414
MTS443
MTS444
MTS445
MTS446
MTS447
MTS448
MTS452
MTS4533
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3MTS341
MTS203
MTS232
MTS341
MTS411
MTS305
MTS414
MTS303
MTS414
MTS433
MTS204, MTS203
-
-
-
-
MTS341
MTS413
MTS413
MTS413
-
-
-
-
MTS451
MTS441Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Game Theory
Health Economics
Labour Economics
Energy Economics
Energy Systems & Policy
Behavioral Economics
Modern Quantitative Methods ECO464
ECO471
ECO472
ECO463
ECO474
ECO470
ECO4733
3
3
3
3
3
3ECO201
ECO201
ECO201
-
-
ECO103
ECO344
Mathematics elective courses
(2 courses to be selected)ECO466/
ECO3053ECO103,
ECO104International Trade or
International Economics1Economics
Core
-MTS430 3 MTS231 Probability and Statistical Models 2
Economics
ElectiveMathematics
Core
ECO
MTS3 Economics elective II 3
- 3 Mathematics elective II 4Mathematics
Elective
- - 3 Non-specialization elective IV 5Non
Specialization 
ElectiveSemester 8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
*All Muslim students are required to register for SEPI. Non-Muslim students may take either SEPI or PLE.
**Personal Effectiveness will be offered in either the 5th or 6th semester. This is a non-credit course and is a part of the 
graduation requirement. It consists of ﬁve 2-hour workshops distributed over the whole semester.
*** Students can take either Final Year Project in Economics (ECO441) or Final Year Project in Mathematics (MTS471).
Note: 
 Students should complete their Responsible Citizen Initiative (Social Internship) after completing their 2nd 
semester at IBA and must fulﬁll this graduation requirement before the end of their 6th semester. 
 Students should engage in their corporate internship after completing their 6th semester of the coursework, 
preferably during the summer break.
Non-specialization electives courses
Four courses are to be chosen from courses other than Economics and Mathematics. These non-specialization elective 
courses may be from different subject areas including Accounting, Finance, Marketing, Management, Social Sciences 
and Liberal Arts, Computer Sciences, or any other ﬁeld.
For further details, visit: www.economics.iba.edu.pk.
https://economics.iba.edu.pk/64 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Bachelor of Science (BS)
Social Sciences and Liberal Arts
The Bachelor of Science (BS) in Social Sciences and Liberal Arts is a 4-year 
interdisciplinary undergraduate program. It draws from and introduces students 
to a range of academic disciplines in social sciences and humanities. The 
combination of core and elective courses in the Social Sciences and Liberal Arts 
degree allows students to develop comprehensive skills in reading and writing, 
quantitative thinking, problem solving, critical inquiry, and research. The 
program offers majors in Psychology, Political Science, Media and Culture, and 
History. Students can also opt for a minor in World Literature or Urban Studies. 
Moreover, the culminating experience can be completed by students in their 
ﬁnal year of the program if they have a CGPA of 3.0 or higher. The experience 
provides students an opportunity to carry out original research projects of their 
own. Students choose a foreign language to study over a period of two semesters 
and complete two different summer internships, one focusing on research skills 
and the other on social service.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
Semesters
Courses
Culminating Experience - I, Culminating
Experience - II (Optional for students with
CGPA 3.0 or above) or Humanities courses34 years
8
40
Total credit hours 124Curriculum structure
**Non-specialization electives can be from the Humanities list or courses offered by other departments/for other 
programs. Note: All students must take both modules (I and II) of the same languageUniversity Core Courses
Non-specialization Courses
Supporting Courses
Social Sciences Core
Major Core + Electives
Personal EffectivenessCulminating Experience - I,
Culminating Experience - II or Humanities coursesF 3 9A
B
C
D
E
G
Total12
23
28
21
31
Pass/Fail
1244
7
9
7
10
40Course category Sections CoursesCredit
hoursRequired courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Core (5)
Introduction to Statistics
Calculus 1
Rhetorical Modes of Writing
Foreign Language I
Foreign Language II
Electives (2)**
Non-specialization elective I
Non-specialization elective IIMTS102
MTS104
SSC106
SSC201/205/209/330
SSC202/206/210/331
-
-3
3
3
4
4
-
--
-
SSC101
-
SSC201/205/209/330
-
-Non-specialization coursesSupporting courses65 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Humanities electives (2 from the following list)***
From Empires to Nation-States: A History of the
Pre-20th Century WorldHST301 3 SSC232
HST354 3 - The Ottoman, Safavid, and Mughal Empires
HUM340 3 - An Introduction to Urdu Poetry and Poetics
HUM341 3 SSC106Freaks, Geeks and Monsters: Exploring the Role of the
Other in FictionHUM341 3 SSC106Freaks, Geeks and Monsters: Exploring the Role of the
Other in Fiction
HUM 393 3 SSC106 Monsters, Witches, and Mad Women in World Literature
HUM355 3 SSC106 Anglo-Indian Narrative and the Postcolonial Subject
HUM357 3 - Philosophy, Logic and Ethics
HUM360 3 - Creative Writing
HUM368 3 SSC232 Intellectual and Cultural History of Muslim Spain
HUM 389 3 - Pakistani Poetry in English
HUM 390 3 - Djinn in World Literature
HUM 392 3 - Philosophy of Social Sciences
HUM371 3 - 1947/1971: Interrogating Partitions, Narrative Selves
HUM372 3 SSC233 History of Anthropological Thought
HUM376 3 - A History of the Cold War
HUM377 3 - Are We Becoming Post-Human? Technology, Society, Ethics
HUM378 3 - A History of the Fable in its Greek, Arabic and Indic Traditions
HUM 464 3 - English over the Ages: History and Reception
HUM380 3 SSC151, SSC221 Advanced Readings in Pakistan's History
HUM382 3 - An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mathematics
HUM383 3 SSC106 Narrative and Identity in Pakistani Literature
HUM385 3 - A Textual Introduction to Rumi
HUM386 3 - Unearthly Things and Sad Destinies: An Introduction to Literary Theory
HUM387 3 - Suﬁsm: A Social, Political and Economic History
HUM388 3 - An Introduction to the Islamic Scholarly TraditionHUM367 3 SSC106Borders and Boundaries: South Asian and Middle
Eastern Feminist Fiction
HUM369 3 SSC221The Making of the Mughal Empire: An Intellectual and
Cultural History
HUM381 3 SSC232, SSC221Suﬁs, Steppe Nomads and Silk Roads: A History of
Islamic Central Asia
HUM384 3 SSC232, SSC221The Persian Literary Culture of Lahore in the Ghaznavid
Period (977-1186)Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
 
MTS202
SSC221
SSC239
SSC238
SSC302
HUM377
HUM382
HUM455
NSC351
NSC354
NSC358
NSC359
NSC360
NSC361
NSC364
AST 251
NSC 363
HUM366
HUM368
HUM371
HUM450
HUM451
MCS3503
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3 
MTS102
-
-
SSC239
MTS202
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SSC232
-
-
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
-Core (5)
Statistical Inference
South Asian History
History of Ideas I
History of Ideas II
Computational Research Methods
Natural Science electives (1 from the following list)***
Are We Becoming Post-human? Technology, Society, Ethics
An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mathematics
Environmental Anthropology
History of Science
Introduction to Environmental Sciences
Sustainable Cities and Communities
An Introduction to the Philosophy of Physics
Climate Change and Us
Science and Medicine in Islamic Societies 700 – 1700
Art and Science
Astronomy
Social and Political History of Medicine
Visual Studies electives (1 from the following list)***
Art of the Islamic World
Intellectual and Cultural History of Muslim Spain
1947/1971: Interrogating Partitions, Narrative Selves
Islamic Book Arts 1200-1800
Screening the Body: Gender, Race and Nation in Visual Culture
Race, Class, and Gender in Film and Television
Crime and Legality in Visual Cultures
Watching Films
Ethnicities, Diaspora and the Media
Literary and Visual Cultures in a New Media Age
Parallel Cinema, Gender and Realism
Fundamentals of Design and Communication
Modern and Contemporary Women Visual Artists of PakistanLights, Camera, History: Representations of
Medieval South Asia in Bollywood
MCS353
MCS357
MCS359
MCS373
MCS375
MCS376
MCS377
HUM 3913
3
3
3
3
3
3
3Digital Activism and Democracy MCS366 3SSC216/217, 
POL/MCS30166 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
HUM397
HUM463
HUM386
HUM452
HUM453
HUM454
HUM454
HUM456
HUM457
HUM458
HUM459
HUM460
HUM485
MCS302
HST358
MCS352
MCS355
MCS371
POL3023
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
-
-
SSC231/SSC233
-
-
-
-
SSC233
-
SSC231
SSC231/SSC233
-
SSC216
-
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC217Urdu Literature for Bilingual Students
Pakistani Contemporary Literature in English
Representation and Resistance in Pakistani English Fiction
Ethnographic Theory and Practice
Spirituality in Islam: Classical Texts and Themes
Prophets in the Abrahamic Traditions
Environmental Anthropology
Evolution of Music in South Asia
Ethnomusicology: Music and Culture
Female Friendship in World Literature
Introduction to Feminist Theory
Food, Self and Society
An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind
Gutenberg to Google: A Social History of Media
The City
Media, Law and Ethics
Analyzing the News
Journalism and Public Discourse
History of Political Thought
POL362
POL364
POL366
POL371
POL373
POL376
POL379
POL451
SSC107
SSC121
SSC213
SSC235
HUM394
HUM395
HUM4623
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3SSC217
SSC217
SSC217, SSC233
SSC217
SSC217
SSC217
-
-
-
-
SSC106
-
-
-
-Pakistan’s Foreign Policy
Political Philosophy
Culture and Power in Human Societies
Modern Political Ideologies: Liberalism, Socialism, Anarchism
History, Theory and Practice of Diplomacy
Perspectives in Pakistan’s Political Economy
Women’s Issues and Activism in Pakistan
Transnational Islamic Politics in the Post-9/11 World
History of Economic Thought
Major Themes in World History
Advanced English Composition
Introduction to Linguistics
Method and theory in the study of religion
The Central Thesis
CalligraphyPOL360 3 SSC217Studying the City in the Global South: Planning,
Politics and DevelopmentCourse titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
HUM466
HUM345
HUM344
HUM396
HUM3613
3
3
3
3-
-
-
-
-What is Law?
Genealogies of Education
Body as Object, Subject and Home
Feminist Legal Theory and Practice
Theater Project the Living Newspaper
HUM465 3 -Studying the City in the Global South: Planning,
Politics, and Development
HUM465 3 -Reading the City-Intersections of climate,
architecture, & urban morphology in cities of the GlobalDEV538 3 - Cities, Gender, and Climate Change
HUM397 3 - Urdu Literature for Bilingual Students
Major core + electives
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
MTS20
SSC221
SSC238
SSC2394
3
3
3SSC218
SSC218
SSC218
SSC218Psychology
Research Methods in Psychology
Human Development
History and Systems of Psychology
Introduction to Social PsychologyPsychology core courses
HRM401/HRM464
MGT221/MGT231
PSY275
PSY340
PSY350
PSY352
PSY353
PSY359
PSY362
PSY364
PSY3653
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
-
SSC218, PSY301
-
SSC218, PSY301
SSC216/218, MCS/PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301Psychology electives (6 from the following list)***
Human Resource Management /Management and Human Resource
Organizational Behaviour /Management and Organizational Behaviour
Memory and Attention
Attachment Over the Lifespan
Consumer Psychology
Industrial and Organizational Psychology
Media Psychology
Cognitive Psychology
Abnormal Psychology
Gender Psychology
Counseling Psychology67 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
PSY366
PSY367
PSY368
PSY369
PSY370
PSY371
PSY372
PSY373
PSY379
PSY374
PSY3763
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301
SSC218, PSY301Cyber Psychology
Personality Psychology
Educational Psychology
Positive Psychology
Clinical Psychology
Physiological Psychology
Cross-Cultural Psychology
Environmental Psychology
Introduction to Testing
Climate Change: Psychology of Denial, Impacts, and Adaptation
Forensic and Criminal Psychology
POL301
POL302
POL303
POL4023
3
3
3SSC217
SSC217
SSC217
SSC217Political Science
Research Methods in Political Science
History of Political Thought
Comparative Politics
Political Systems and Political RegimesPolitical Science core courses
ECO560
POL403
POL404
HUM376
HUM3803
3
3
3
3-
-
-
-
SSC151, SSC221Public Policy Analysis: Theory and Practice
Urban Management in the Global South
The Questions of Citizenship and the Postcolonial Subject
A History of the Cold War
Advanced Readings in Pakistan's History
POL350
POL352
POL353
POL354
POL355
POL3593
3
3
3
3SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301
-
SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301Political Violence, Civil War, and Terrorism
Foreign Policy in China
An Introduction to Legal Theory
War: Conceptual Underpinnings
Human Rights and Law
The Modern Middle EastPsychology electives (6 from the following list)***
POL406 3SSC216/217,
POL/MCS301Giving and Misgivings: Explorations in
Charity, Humanitarianism, and Development
POL351 3POL406 Digital Activism and Democracy 3SSC216/217,
POL/MCS301
SSC217/218,
POL/PSY301Political PsychologyPOL360 3 SSC217Studying the City in the Global South: Planning,
Politics and DevelopmentCourse titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
POL362
POL364
POL365
POL366
POL367
POL370
POL371
POL372
POL373
POL374
HUM396
POL375
POL376
POL377
POL378
POL379
POL3803
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3SSC217
SSC217
SSC217
SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301
SSC217
SSC217, POL301
SSC217
SSC217, POL301
-
SSC217, POL301
SSC217
SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301
-Pakistan's Foreign Policy
Political Philosophy
Introduction to Foreign Policy Analysis
Culture and Power in Human Societies
Global Urbanisms
Politics in Colonial and Post-Colonial Punjab
Modern Political Ideologies: Liberalism, Socialism, Anarchism
Negotiation and Conﬂict Resolution
History, Theory and Practice of Diplomacy
Community Planning and Development
Feminist Legal Theory and Practice
History of Decolonization
Perspectives in Pakistan’s Political Economy
Politics of Resistance in the Middle East
China’s Contemporary Security Environment
Women’s Issues and Activism in Pakistan
Political Sociology of Modern Sindh
POL450 3SSC217, 
POL301Winners, Losers, and Bystanders: Political Economy
Perspectives on Global Changes
MCS340
MCS310
MCS311
MCS3124
3
3
3SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216Critical Theories and Methods
Media Aesthetics and History: Film, TV and Digital Media
Critical Media Practice I: Digital Image, Sound, and Story
Critical Media Practice II: Multimodal Publication and DesignMedia and Culture
Media and Culture core courses
MCS352
MCS353
MCS343
MCS355
MCS357
MCS3583
3
3
3
3
3SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
SSC216
-Media, Law, and Ethics
Race, Class, and Gender in Film and Television
Postcolonial Science Fiction and Fantasy
Analyzing the News
Crime and Legality in Visual Cultures
Journalism Essentials for Business: Visibility in the Age of New MediaMedia and Culture electives (6 from the following list)***POL451 3 - Transnational Islamic Politics in the Post-9/11 World68 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
HST352
HST353
HST354
HUM368
HUM369
HUM3713
3
3
3
3
3SSC232
SSC232
SSC232
-
SSC232
SSC221A History of the Indian Ocean World
Historiography of Early Islam
Ecological History
The Ottoman, Safavid, and Mughal Empires
Intellectual and Cultural History of Muslim Spain
The Making of the Mughal Empire: An Intellectual and Cultural HistoryHistory electives (6 from the following list)***Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
-HUM376/ HST356
HUM378
HUM379
HUM380
HUM3813
3
3
3
3-
-
-
-
SSC151, SS221
HUM384 3SSC232,
SSC221Suﬁs, Steppe Nomads and Silk Roads: A History of
Islamic Central Asia
HUM387 3SSC232,
SSC221The Persian Literary Culture of Lahore in the
Ghaznavid Period (977-1186)
MCS350 3 SSC216Lights, Camera, History: Representations of Medieval
South Asia in Bollywood1947/1971: Interrogating Partitions, Narrative Selves
A History of the Cold War
A History of the Fable in its Greek, Arabic and Indic Traditions
Don Quixote and its Andalusian Milieu
Advanced Readings in Pakistan's History
NSC361
POL302
POL370
POL375
SSC121
HST359
HST360
HUM464
NSC363
HST361
POL404
HST3553
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3SSC217
SSC217, POL301
SSC217, POL301
-
SSC232
 
SSC216Science and Medicine in Islamic Societies 700 – 1700
History of Political Thought
Politics in Colonial and Post-Colonial Punjab
History of Decolonization
Major Themes in World History
Language, History and Politics
Women and Gender in South Asian History
English over the Ages: History and Reception
Social and Political History of Medicine
Indian Oceans History
The Questions of Citizenship and the Postcolonial Subject
Labour, Capital and Colonialism: The making of modern South AsiaHST357
HST3513
3Suﬁsm: A Social, Political and Economic History
Print, Identity and the Public Sphere: Urdu in early colonial north India
***Not all electives listed will be offered in any given academic year.Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
MCS359
MCS360
MCS3643
3
3SSC216
SSC216
-Watching Films
History of Film
Foundations of Screenwriting
MCS368 3 SSC216, MCS301 Media Anthropology
MCS383 3 SSC216 New Media and Citizen Journalism
MCS371 3
3SSC216 Journalism and Public Discourse
MCS373 SSC216 Ethnicities, Diaspora and the Media
3 POL366 SSC216/217 Culture and Power in Human Societies
3 MCS375 SSC216 Literary and Visual Cultures in a New Media Age
3 MCS376 SSC216 Parallel Cinema, Gender and Realism
3
3MCS377 SSC216 Fundamentals of Design and Communication
MCS378 SSC216 Karachi in the Media
3 HUM393 Monsters, witches and mad women in world literature
3 MCS341 Communication for Social Change3 MCS379 SSC216 Fan Studies: Theory and Practice
3 MCS380 -
-Feminism Technology and Media
3 MCS450 Cultural Globalization and Media
3 HST357 Print, Identity and the Public Sphere: Urdu in early colonial north India3 PSY353SSC216/218,
MCS/PSY301Media Psychology3 MCS342 -Reimagining Shakespeare: Adaptations in
Film and LiteratureMCS372 3SSC216/217,
POL/MCS301Political CommunicationaMCS366 3SSC216/217,
POL/MCS301Digital Activism and Democracy
HST302
HST303
HST3043
3
4SSC232
SSC232
SSC232Topics in Historiography
Twentieth Century Global History
Research Methods in History: Primary Source GenresHistory
History core courses
HST301 3 SSC232From Empires to Nation-States: A History of the
Pre-20th Century World69 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Students can opt for a minor in World Literature or Urban Studies. Students will take one 
required core and then choose three electives from the humanities list that can also be 
counted as minor electives. Minor core + electives
***Not all electives will be offered in any given academic year. Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
SSC 214 Introduction to World Literature 3 SSC218World Literature core course
Introduction to Urban Studies SSC234 3Urban Studies core course
HST358 SSC 234 The City 3
POL403 SSC 234 Urban Management in the Global South 3Urban Studies electives (3 from the following list)***HUM458
HUM393
HUM397
HUM341
HUM386
HUM463
HUM389
HUM390
HUM340
HUM383
MCS342
MCS3433
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214
SSC214World Literature electives (3 from the following list)***
Female Friendship in World Literature
Monsters, witches and mad women in world literature
Urdu Literature for Bilingual Students
Freaks, Geeks and Monsters: Exploring the Role of the Other in Fiction
Representation and Resistance in Pakistani English Fiction
Pakistani Contemporary Literature in English
Pakistani Poetry in English
Djinn in World Literature
An Introduction to Urdu Poetry and Poetics
Narrative and Identity in Pakistani Literature
Reimagining Shakespeare: Adaptations in Film and Literature
Postcolonial Science Fiction and FantasyHUM367 3 SSC214Borders and Boundaries: South Asian and Middle
Eastern Feminist Fiction
POL360 3 SSC 234Studying the City in the Global South: Planning,
Politics and Development
DEV538 SSC 234 Cities, Gender, and Climate Change 3
NSC358 SSC 234 Sustainable Cities and Communities 3
PSY378 SSC 234- Urban Mental Health 3HUM465 3 SSC 234Reading the City-Intersections of climate,
architecture, & urban morphology in cities of the Global
Semester-wise sequence of courses
MTS104 3 - Calculus 1 1Non
Specialization
 Core
-SSC101 3 - Critical Reading and Writing 2University
Core
SSC231
SSC2323 Fundamentals of Sociology 3Social
Science
Core
- 3Introduction to Historical
Methods4Social
Science
Core
SSC239 - 3 History of Ideas-I 5Supporting
CourseSemester 1 FreshmanCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
- 3 - Major Core I 1 Major Core
-- 3 - Major Core -II 2 Major Core
-
-3 Humanities elective-I 3Humanities
Elective
- 3 Natural Science elective 4Natural
Science
Elective
SSC302 MTS202 4Computational Research
Methods5Supporting
CourseSemester 5 JuniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeMTS102 3 - Introduction to Statistics 1Non
Specialization
 Core
-SSC106 3 - Rhetorical Modes of Writing 2Non
Specialization
 Core
SSC218
SSC2213 Introduction to Psychology 3Social
Science
Core
- 3 South Asian History 4Supporting
Course
SSC238 - 3 History of Ideas-II 5Supporting
CourseSemester 2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
HUM201 3 - Speech Communication 1University
Core
-MTS202 3 MTS102 Statistical Inference 2Supporting
Course
SSC151
SSC201/ 
205/209/
3303 Pakistan History 3University
Core
- 4 Foreign Language-I 4Non
Specialization
 Core
SSC233 - 3Introduction to Social and
Cultural Anthropology5Social
Science
CoreSemester 3 SophomoreCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type70 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
S202/206/
210/3314SSC201/205/
209/330Foreign Language II 1Non
Specialization
 Core
-SSC216 3 -Introduction to
Media and Culture 2Social
Science Core
SSC217
SSC234/
SSC2143 Introduction to Political Science 3Social
Science Core
- 3Introduction to Urban Studies/
Introduction to World Literature4Social
Science Core
SSC301/
HUM- 3Islamic Scholarly Traditions/
Philosophy, Logic and Ethics (PLE)**5University
Core
S202/206/
210/331-6-week responsible citizen
initiative - no creditSummer -Semester 4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type71 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
- 3 - Major elective-II 1Major
Core
-- 3 - Major elective-III 2 Major Core
-
-3 Major elective-IV 3Major
Elective
- 3 Non-specialization elective-II 4Non
Specialization
Elective
SSC491HST/PSY/
POL301 &
MCS3403 Culminating Experience- I 5Semester 7 SeniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeImportant note
 Students should complete their responsible citizen initiative after completing their 
2nd semester at IBA and must fulﬁll this graduation requirement before the end of 
their 6th semester.
 Students should engage in their Social Sciences research internships during their 3rd 
summer of enrollment, i.e., after completing their 6th semester of the course work.- 3 - Major elective-V 1Major
Elective
-- 3 - Major elective-VI 2Major
Elective
-
SSC4923 Humanities elective-II 3Humanities
Elective
SSC491 for
CE II6Culminating Experience-II
or 2 Humanities Electives4 -Semester 8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
- 3 - Major core-III 1Major
Core
-HST/PSY/
POL301 & 
MCS3404 -Major core-IV Research
Methods2Major
Core
-
-3 Major elective-I 3Major
Elective
- 3 Non-specialization elective-I 4Non
Specialization 
Elective
- - 3 Visual Studies elective 5Visual
Studies
Elective
--6-week Social Sciences research
internship - no creditSummer -Semester 6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type72 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS)
Development Studies
MS Development Studies (Dev. Studies) is a multi and interdisciplinary program 
that explores critical topics of development theory and practices, introducing 
development as a process of evolution of societies. Development Studies is also a 
policy debate that considers the speciﬁcity of societies in terms of history, 
ecology, culture, technology, politics, etc., and how these differences both can 
and often should translate into varied ‘local’ responses to regional or global 
processes and varied strategies of development and methods.
MS Dev. Studies provides high-quality and rigorous training needed to 
understand the methods, policy, and practices of development. The program 
offers a solid multi-disciplinary social science formation in theory, quantitative 
methods, and applications employed in various ﬁelds of development. The 
Department of Economics and the Department of Social Sciences & Liberal Arts 
jointly offer the program.
This program emphasizes understanding the historical perspectives and recent 
advances in development and caters to the growing market for analysts and 
policymakers. Graduates from this program will be prepared for careers in 
research institutions, government entities, development agencies, international 
organizations, and policy-related think tanks.
The interview panel will decide which foundation courses are exempted/recommended.
MS Thesis may be replaced with a project along with an additional course of three credit 
hours.
*The grade on the MS thesis and MS research project would be pass/fail and will not be 
counted in the CGPA.Distribution of credit hoursCourse category
Foundation courses1
Core courses
Elective courses
MS Thesis2
Total0
12
12
6
302
4
4
1
11Courses Credit hoursEligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
The program is designed as a 2-year full-time program and students will be 
admitted as full-time only during the coursework.
Course requirements
MS courses: 24 credit hours (8 courses) for students who are exempted from 
foundation courses and up to 30 credit hours (10 courses) for students who take 
foundation courses. At the time of admission, the interview panel will decide 
which students are exempted from taking foundation courses.
MS thesis: 6 credit hours. Students who do not wish to opt for writing a thesis can 
replace it with an MS Project (3 units) and an additional course of 3 credit hours.
Course title Course code Credit hours Pre-requisite
Analytical Tools in Development
Theories and Concepts in Economics
Core courses
Theories and Critical Approaches in Development
Anthropology & Development
Policy Analysis: Theory & Practice
Research Methods in Development
Core elective
Elective I
Elective II
Elective III
Elective IV
Thesis
MS thesis*DEV531
DEV532
Course code
DEV533
DEV534
DEV535
DEV536
Course code
ECO631
-
-
-
Course code
DEV5913
3
Credit hours
3
3
3
3
Credit hours
3
3
3
3
Credit hours
6-
-
Pre-requisite
-
-
-
-
Pre-requisite
ECO531
-
-
-
Pre-requisite
-73 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
*End of Year 1 – Summer: - Students will choose an area of interest, a broad research topic 
and a potential supervisor for their research and must have it approved by the relevant 
department before the start of the next Fall semester.
- Applied ﬁeld study module (zero credit hours but compulsory).
**End of Year 2 – Summer: Thesis must be completed by the end of summer for eligibility 
towards graduation.Semester-wise offerings of the courses
Other Students (Not exempted from foundation courses)Semester 1 – Fall
Theories and Critical Approaches in Development
Anthropology & Development
Elective I
Elective II
Semester 2 – Spring
Policy Analysis: Theory & Practice
Research Methods in Development
Elective III
Elective IV
Semester 3 – Fall
MS Thesis
Semester 1 – Fall
Analytical Tools in Development
Theories and Concepts in Economics
Theories and Critical Approaches in Development
Anthropology & Development
Semester 2 – Spring
Policy Analysis: Theory & Practice
Research Methods in Development
Elective I
Elective II
Semester 3 - Fall / Semester 4 – Spring
MS Thesis along with Elective III and Elective IVS. No.
1
2
3
4
S. No.
1
2
3
4
S. No.
1
S. No.
1
2
3
4
S. No.
1
2
3
4
S. No.
1Course code
DEV533
DEV534
DEV566
DEV551
Course code
DEV535
DEV536
Course code
Course code
DEV531
DEV532
DEV533
DEV534
Course code
ECO537
ECO631
-
Course codeCourse type
Core
Core
Elective
Elective
Course type
Core
Core
Elective
Elective
Course type
Thesis
Course type
Foundation
Foundation
Core
Core
Course type
Core
Core
Elective
Elective
Course type
Thesis and ElectivesStudents exempted from four foundation coursesElective courses 
Course code Credit hours
DEV551
DEV552
DEV553
DEV554
DEV555
DEV556
DEV561
DEV562
DEV563
DEV564
DEV565
DEV566
DEV567
DEV568
DEV571
DEV572
DEV573
DEV574
DEV575
DEV5763
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3Course category Course title
Conﬂict Studies
Agrarian Development, Food Policy & Rural Poverty
Environment, Climate Change and Sustainability
Cities & Urban Development
Data Science and Development
Entrepreneurship in Development
Gender Studies
Migration and Mobility
Poverty and Inequality
Population Studies
Health & Development
Labor and Social Movements
Political Ecology
Leadership in Development
Public Financial Management
Aid & Development
Technology, Culture and Development
Communication and Social Change
Decolonizing Methods
Nature of Inquiry and Survey DesignPhysical
Resources
Human
Resources
Society &
Economy74 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Economics
The MS Economics program is designed to provide a solid background in theory, 
quantitative methods and applications appropriate to the needs of economists 
involved in policy planning, analysis and forecasting of public and private sectors. 
The curriculum of this program has been designed to meet international 
standards.
This program emphasizes on applied economics and caters to the growing 
market for economic analysts. Graduates from this program will be able to teach 
and conduct quality research in the ﬁelds of their interest and will be prepared 
for careers in universities, research organizations, business enterprises, 
government organizations, and multinational companies.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
The minimum duration of the program is 2 years.
Class Timings
MS Economics is offered for full-time students as well as  for  part-time  students. 
Classes in MS Economics are scheduled only in evenings (6:00-9:00 pm) on 
weekdays or any time (between 9:00 am - 9:00 pm) on Saturdays.
Teaching/research assistant positions
Teaching/research assistant positions are available in the department for 
full-time MS students. These positions are offered only to those students who 
maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.00 in each semester in the MS program. 
Teaching/research assistants must not work elsewhere.
Requirements for MS Economics
Course requirements
MS courses: 30 credit hours (courses)
MS thesis: 6 credit hoursFoundation/Refresher courses in summer semester
Two foundation/refresher courses of 3 credit hours each will be offered during 
the summer semester. BS Economics and BS Economics & Mathematics 
graduates from IBA are exempted from the 2 foundation courses. For other 
candidates, the admission interview panel will decide which foundation courses 
are exempted.
 These two courses will be offered during the summer semester. 
 The student will have to obtain at least 60% marks (Grade-C minus). 
 Admission in MS Economics will be conﬁrmed after passing these courses with at least a B- grade. 
 The courses and grades will not be counted in the transcript and CGPA. 
 Students will have to attend classes with at least 75% attendance to be eligible to appear in the ﬁnal 
 exam. 
 Half of the full course fee will be charged for each foundation course.Required courses
Course category Courses Credit hours
6
2
1
918
6
6
30Core courses
Elective courses
Thesis
Total
Courses S. No. Credit hours Course code
3
3EC-547
ECO545 Economics
Mathematics and Statistics1
275 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Semester-wise sequence of courses
*Students have the option to take 1 additional elective course and an MS research project (ECO698) in 
place of MS thesis. The grade on MS thesis and MS research project would be pass/fail and will not be 
counted in the CGPA.
For further details, visit: www.economics.iba.edu.pk.List of elective courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3Combinatorial Optimization
International Trade
Issues in Pakistan Economy
Climate Change Economics
Behavioural Economics
Economic Forecasting
Public Policy Analysis: Theory and Practice
Environmental and Resource Economics
Financial Economics
Health Economics
History of Economic Thought
Monetary Economics
Public Economics
Time Series Modelling
Industrial Economics
Game theory and Competitive Strategy
Water Economics and Policy
Microeconomics of Public Policy Analysis
Social Impact Evaluation
Behavioural and Experimental Economics
Labour EconomicsCSE654
ECO539
ECO544
ECO551
ECO554
ECO555
ECO560
ECO561
ECO562
ECO563
ECO564
ECO566
ECO567
ECO570
ECO571
ECO573
ECO574
ECO575
ECO577
ECO578
ECO654-
ECO531
ECO532
ECO531
ECO531
MTS536
ECO531/ECO501
ECO531
ECO531
ECO531
ECO532
ECO532
ECO531
MTS5366
ECO531
ECO531/ECO501
ECO531/ECO501
ECO531/ECO501
ECO531/ECO501
ECO531
ECO531Fall semester
Spring semester
Fall/Spring semesterAdvanced Microeconomics
Advanced Macroeconomics
Econometrics I
Elective I
Econometrics II
Research Methodology
Development Economics
Elective II
MS Thesis*3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
6ECO631
ECO632
ECO537
-
ECO538
ECO591
ECO534
-
-S. No. Courses Credit hours Course code
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
https://economics.iba.edu.pk/76 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Journalism
The Master of Science (MS) in Journalism is the ﬂagship degree program in 
Journalism at the School of Economics and Social Sciences at IBA. The 1.5-year 
long program allows students to immerse themselves in all forms of Journalism 
– digital, audio and video – and gain practical experience in a newsroom under 
the guidance of experienced instructors. The Centre of Excellence in Journalism 
at IBA, provides support to this program through its state-of-the-art facilities and 
strong linkages with the industry.  This is an opportunity for students to learn 
cutting-edge skills to enable them to ﬁnd employment in reporting and 
production across various media platforms. They can also explore the 
intersection of technology and media and its impact on the journalism industry 
in Pakistan.
Learning outcomes
● Critical thinking
● Media and information literacy
● Foundational knowledge of Pakistan and the world
● Industry-speciﬁc concepts, skills and issues
● Independent thinking and innovation
● Leadership skills
● Apply knowledge in the real-world context
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
The minimum duration of the program is 1.5 years.Required courses
Course category Courses Credit hours
3
4
5
1
139
12
15
3
39Seminars
Skills courses
Labs
Capstone project
TotalSemester-wise sequence of courses
Semester - 1Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
JOU504 3 - CEJ Newsroom 1 Core
-JOU502 3 JOU506 Digital News Reporting Core
JOU503
JOU5013 Governance and Society in Pakistan Core
JOU508 3 News Writing and Reporting Core
JOU500 JOU507 3 The Profession of Journalism Core
Semester - 3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
JOU511 3 - CEJ Newsroom (Summer) Core
JOU512 3 - Specialized Journalism II Core
Semester - 4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
JOU600 3 - Capstone Project Core
- - - Internship  Semester - 2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
JOU509 3 - CEJ Newsroom II Core
-JOU508 3 - Current Affairs TV Lab Core
JOU505
JOU5063 International Affairs Core
- 3 Multimedia Journalism Core
JOU507 - 3 Specialized Journalism I Core
Internship
The three-month internship aims to embed students in a conventional 
newsroom in Pakistan’s dynamic media industry. Students will be expected to 
carry out the internship at a media house/ publication of their choosing after the 
completion of their coursework in semester 4. This internship does not carry any 
weightage in terms of credit hours but is a mandatory requirement for 
graduation. Students will be assisted in placements to newsrooms by the MSJ 
faculty.77 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
PhD Economics
The PhD Economics program is designed to provide a solid background in 
theory, quantitative methods, and applications appropriate to the needs of 
economists involved in policy planning, analysis, and forecasting in the public 
and private sectors. PhD Economics emphasizes on Applied Economics and 
caters to the growing market for Economic analysts. The curriculum of this 
program has been designed to meet international standards and the students 
will ﬁnd the program to be intellectually challenging and personally rewarding. 
Graduates from this program will be able to teach and conduct quality research 
in the ﬁelds of their interest and will be prepared for careers in universities, 
research organizations, business enterprises, government organizations, and 
multinational companies.
Duration
For the eligibility criteria, refer to page 10.
Eligibility criteria
Minimum duration of the program is 4 years and the maximum time allowed is 
8 years.
Teaching/research assistant positions
PhD program is a full-time morning program. IBA  will offer Teaching/Research 
assistant positions to PhD students along with a tuition fee waiver. 
Teaching/research assistants must not work elsewhere. A PhD student must 
spend at least the ﬁrst two years of the degree in IBA as a full-time student. The 
provision of a stipend will be conditional on the satisfactory performance of 
students. The maximum duration for the stipends will be six years.List of core and elective courses
Fall semester 
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
4
4
4Topics in Microeconomic Theory
Topics in Macroeconomic Theory
Econometric AnalysisECO644
ECO645
ECO646-
-
-
Spring semester 
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
4
4
4Topics in Research Methods
Elective I
Elective IIECO650
-
--
-
-
Course titleDissertation
Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
24 PhD Dissertation ECO799 -
16
8
24
484
2
1
7Course categoryRequired courses
Courses Credit hours
Core courses
Elective courses
Thesis
Total
78 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
PhD EconomicsElective courses
Comprehensive examinations
A comprehensive examination will consist of microeconomics and 
macroeconomics. In case of failing one part  of the examination, the candidate 
will have to give the complete comprehensive examination again. Students will 
be allowed two attempts to qualify for the comprehensive examination. Students 
are, however, expected to pass it within two years from the commencement of 
the PhD program.
Oral defense of dissertation proposal
At the end of the 2nd year, students are expected to present and defend their 
PhD dissertation proposal.
Dissertation defense
Students are expected to submit and defend their dissertation in two years after 
successful completion of their coursework.
For further details, visit: economics.iba.edu.pk.Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
4
4
4
4
4Macroeconomics Modelling and Public Policy Analysis
Topic in Environmental Economics
Topics in International Trade
Advanced Financial Economics
Topics in Monetary EconomicsECO655
ECO649
ECO653
ECO643
ECO 656-
-
-
-
-
https://economics.iba.edu.pk/SCHOOL OF MATHEMATICS
AND COMPUTER SCIENCE
(SMCS)79 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-2480 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
The School of Mathematics and Computer Science (SMCS) of IBA is one of the fastest growing schools for excellence in teaching and research of computer science in Pakistan. The 
SMCS has a qualiﬁed faculty comprising of experienced practitioners and researchers that enrich teaching, provide business consultancies, support startups, and prepare students 
for higher education and industry. The school has state-of-the-art facilities focusing on undergraduate and graduate education. The research labs for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Web 
Science, Big Data and Telecommunications allow computer science students to delve deep into the technological realm. In contrast, the mathematics programs offer a thorough 
background in pure and applied mathematics ranging from high-performance computing to commutative algebra.School of Mathematics and Computer Science (SMCS)
I am greatly honored to share the Dean’s message with my faculty members who have contributed with their hard work, vision, and leadership, to make 
this school one of the best science schools in the country.
The history of science programs in IBA dates to 1983 when it started offering a diploma program in Computer Science to overcome the shortage of 
information and system analysts in the country. Since then, the venture has matured and now offers BS, MS, and PhD programs in Mathematics and 
Computer Science. We have established research labs for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Web Science, Big Data, and Telecommunication, supporting the MS and 
PhD programs in the diverse domains of Computer Science. Likewise, the MS and PhD programs in Mathematics aim to provide a thorough background 
in theory, quantitative methods, and applications commensurate with international standards, offering the opportunity of highly specialized training in 
selected areas of pure and applied mathematics.
As IBA moves into the new system of schools, the newly established SMCS must continue to incubate and stay poised toward cutting-edge research and 
development in science and technology. In the coming years, we plan to enhance our academic programs by investing in our star faculty, establishing 
strong research and industrial ties across the globe, and bringing new specializations in Mathematics, Computer Science and allied ﬁelds. Our mission is 
to impart quality education to students selected purely on merit, irrespective of ethnicity, gender, religion or ﬁnancial means.
The foremost aim of SMCS will be to establish academic linkages with leading science schools of the world so that we can enhance our teaching and research. This would assist towards 
innovations through joint research projects, focused on bringing new knowledge to the classrooms, thereby enriching academic transactions at IBA. The second aim is to offer more 
streams of specializations. We have introduced an MS program in Data Science and also plan to offer more programs in Mathematics and Computer Science. This will help diversify our 
portfolio to attract brilliant students, as well as high-caliber researchers and faculty. We envisage more productive and
society-driven research in the new school. A new BS program in Mathematics is also a step in this direction.
With the IBA’s mission to undertake consultancy and applied research to enrich teaching and inﬂuence thinking on important issues of business and public policy, we believe that 
SMCS will play a pivotal role to bring a signiﬁcant contribution to the global challenges that science and technology can solve.
Dr. Shakeel Ahmed KhojaDean’s Message
Department of Computer Science
The Department of Computer Science is one of the two departments at the School of Mathematics and Computer 
Science (SMCS), the Institute of Business Administration (IBA) Karachi. The department offers bachelor, master, and 
doctoral degree programs in Computer Science. The department has recently launched a long-awaited master's 
program in Data Science as well.
The full-time faculty members of the department teach a variety of courses over a wide range of the entire computer 
science spectrum. Some of the areas of specialization of full-time faculty members are theory, machine learning/AI, 
quantum computation, computer vision, text analytics, robotics, computer architecture, and human-computer interaction.
Some of the many strengths of the department include its high faculty-to-student ratio, the state-of-the-art facilities, 
the renowned visiting faculty from the industry to teach industry-speciﬁc courses, the strong focus on undergraduate 
education, and research. The faculty emphasizes interdisciplinary and encourages students to work with them as well 
as the faculty of other departments and schools.
Graduates from the department join the computing industry, multinational organizations, startups, consulting 
companies, government services, and nonproﬁt organizations. The tech industry in Pakistan is quick to offer jobs and 
internships to the students of the program and often offers them better opportunities for personal and professional 
growth. Many of our students get enrolled in the graduate programs of the leading universities around the world as 
well. Moreover, the alumni network of our department is very strong and they provide continuous support to our 
existing student body in terms of guidance and mentoring.
Visit website: https://cs.iba.edu.pk/.Department of Mathematical Sciences
The Department of Mathematical Sciences is the other department under the umbrella of the School of Mathematics 
and Computer Science at IBA-Karachi. The department offers undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs in 
mathematics, besides offering teaching services to other departments for basic undergraduate mathematics.
The faculty at the Department of Mathematical Sciences represents a diverse team of mathematicians, statisticians, 
and physicists, having skills in many different areas of mathematics; these include algebra, analysis, topology, statistics, 
econometrics, partial differential equations & scientiﬁc computing, quantum ﬁeld theory, gravitation, discrete 
mathematics, and data analytics.
The department is currently housed in the south wing of the Tabba Academic Center at the main campus of IBA. We 
have state-of-the-art facilities including classrooms, labs, and seminar lounges. Our computational infrastructure 
includes modern scientiﬁc computing server hardware-based and distributed memory multiprocessing in 
combination with computational and visualization software libraries for numeric and symbolic computing.
Mathematical Sciences has good local outreach in that we frequently collaborate with local NGOs promoting STEAM 
(Science, technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) activities for aspiring young students of all age groups - in 
addition to carrying out our university research and teaching activities.
The Department of Mathematical Sciences is an exciting place to visit. https://mathematics.iba.edu.pk/.Overview of departments
https://mathematics.iba.edu.pk/81 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Bachelor of Science (BS) Computer Science is a 4-year degree program that includes courses from theoretical Computer Science, Technology, Social Sciences and Liberal Arts, and 
other areas. The aim is to educate students to become skilled professionals with problem-solving capabilities in Computer Science (CS) and allied areas. It also prepares students 
for research and development roles. It comprises of a total of 131 units, which are divided into university core, CS core, CS elective, non-specialization core, and non-specialization 
elective with 12, 62, 21, 24, and 12 units respectively. The non-specialization courses and electives are from supporting disciplines of Mathematics, Physics and Communication. The 
program’s core courses, and general electives are from supporting disciplines of Mathematics, Physics, Communication, Accounting, Economics, Finance, Human Resource 
Management, Marketing, Management, and Social Sciences and Liberal Arts. A wide range of core and elective courses is engineered to provide the students with enough ﬂexibility 
to choose a professional career path of their interest.
CS graduates have successfully developed their careers with entrepreneurial start-ups of their own as well as getting placed in good software houses, ICT companies, ﬁnancial 
institutions, business solution providers and multinational companies.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .Bachelor of Science (BS) Computer Science
Curriculum structure
University Core
Computer Science Core
Computer Science Electives
Program Core
General Electives
Personal EffectivenessA
B
C
D
E
F
TOTAL4
18
7
8
4
1
4212
63
21
24
11
Pass/Fail
131Credit hours Course Section Course categoryDuration
Semesters
Courses
Total credit hours4 years
8
41
131Curriculum structure
82 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Computer Science electives
(7 to be  selected from the following list)
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Web Based Application Development
Design Patterns
Data Warehousing
Compiler Design
Cloud Computing
Computer Graphics
Game Design and Development
System Modeling and Simulation
Application Development for Mobile Devices
Introduction to Computer Vision
Network Security
Business Intelligence
Introduction to Image Processing
Introduction to Bioinformatics
Introduction to Data Mining
Data Warehousing
Social Computing
E-Commerce
IS SecurityCSE308
CSE318
CSE343
CSE344
CSE351
CSE352
CSE353
CSE403
CSE450
CSE454
CSE455
CSE459
CSE462
CSE463
CSE464
MIS343
MIS406
MIS456
MIS4573
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3CSE341
CSE247
CSE341
CSE309, CSE345
CSE248, CSE331, CSE34
-
-
CSE345
-
CSE248
CSE341, MIS343
CSE307
CSE247
CSE247, MTS102
CSE341
CSE341
-
-
CSE341
Note: Senior students with at least 3.0 CGPA may also opt for 500-level graduate courses as CS-electives.General electives
Any course other than Computer Science is considered as a general elective which also 
includes Social Sciences as well as languages.
Semester-wise sequence of courses
CSE141 4 - Introduction to Programming 1 CS Core
-CSE101 3 - Introduction to Computing 2 CS Core
MTS101
SSC1013 Calculus I 3Program
Core
- 3 Critical Reading and Writing 4University
Core
SSC151/
SSC301- 3Pakistan History or Islamic
Scholarly Tradition5University
CoreSemester 1 FreshmanCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
CSE142 4 CSE141Object Oriented Programming
Techniques1 CS Core
-HUM201 3 SSC103 Speech Communication 2University
Core
MTS102
MTS2113 Introduction to Statistics 3Program
Core
MTS101 3 Discrete Mathematics 4Program
Core
MTS232 MTS101 3 Calculus - II 5Program
Core
SCI102 - 3 Physics 6Program
CoreSemester - 2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type83 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
- 3-CS elective-I 1 CS Elective
CSE345CSE331 3 CSE247 Software Engineering 2 CS Core
CSE341
MGT2113 Operating Systems 3 CS Core
CSE247 4 Database Systems 4 CS Core
CSE312 HUM201 3 Business Communication 5 ProgramSemester 5 JuniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeCSE241 4CSE101,
MTS211Digital Logic Design 1 CS Core
MTS101CSE247 4CSE142,
MTS211Data Structures 2 CS Core
MTS203
MTS3063 Linear Algebra 3Program
Core
MTS232 3 Numerical Analysis 4Program
Core
- - 3 General elective-I 5General
ElectiveSemester 3 SophomoreCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
CSE317 3 CSE247Design and Analysis of
Algorithm1 CS Core
-CSE441 4 CSE331 Systems Programming 2 CS Core
-
-3 CS elective-II 3CS
Elective
- 3 CS elective -III 4CS
Elective
SSC240 - 3 General elective-II 5General
ElectiveSemester 6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
CSE407 3 CSE312 Human Computer Interaction 1 CS Core
-CSE493 0CSE312,
CSE341Final Year Project 2CS Core
/Project
-
-3 CS elective-IV 3CS
Elective
- 3 CS elective-V 4CS
Elective
- - 3 General elective-III 5General
ElectiveSemester 7 SeniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
CSE307 3 CSE247Introduction to
Artiﬁcial Intelligence1 CS Core
CSE141,
CSE211CSE248 4CSE101,
CSE142Computer Communication
and Networking2 CS Core
CSE309
CSE3453 Theory of Automata 3 CS Core
CSE241,
CSE2474Computer Architecture and
Assembly Language4 CS CoreSemester 4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type84 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
CSE494 6 CSE493 Final Year Project 1CS Core
/Project
-MIS454 3 MGT211 Audit, Ethics and IS Issues 2 CS Core
-
-3 CS elective- VI 3CS
Elective
- 3 CS elective- VII 4CS
Elective
- - 3 General elective-IV 5General
ElectiveSemester 8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
- Students are eligible to carry out their Responsible Citizen Initiative (RCI)/social internships right after their 1st year 
of studies/2nd semester and should complete this mandatory graduation requirement by the end of their 3rd year 
of studies/6th semester.
- Corporate internship can only be carried out after the 6th semester (i.e. after completion of all the courses till the 6th 
semester as mentioned in the semester-wise break up above).
85 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Bachelor of Science (BS)
Mathematics
Bachelor of Science (BS) Mathematics at IBA is a 4-year degree program. Its 
uniqueness lies in the offer of earning concentrations in allied areas of sciences 
while adhering to the mathematics core. The ﬂexibility and diversity that this 
scheme offers to students in studying mathematics aligned with the current 
common structure of the BS-Math programs worldwide while keeping in line 
with HEC guidelines. Regular academic, as well as professional career 
development guidance is also available to students to help them cope with 
challenges more effectively.
This program prepares graduates with diverse skills, attributes, and ﬁeld 
knowledge, which are critical ingredients for a successful applied sciences 
career.
The program aims to equip students with sufﬁcient analytical and 
computational skills for a successful corporate career, a career in education, or a 
career in industry. A diverse skillset will also enable students to seek promising 
careers in research and development in mathematics and related ﬁelds, applied 
sciences, engineering sciences, actuarial sciences, economics,  data sciences,  
quantitative ﬁnance, computing, banking, and statistics, and post-graduate 
study in mathematics, and theoretical physics as well as university teaching.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
Semesters
Courses
Research Project
Total credit hours4 years
8
40
1
128Curriculum structure
3
3
3SSC101
SSC151
HUM357Course category Course code Credit hours
Critical Reading and Writing
Pakistan History
Speech Communication
Islamic Scholarly Tradition
Or Philosophy, Logic, and Ethics (PLE)*SSC301 /
HUM3573A. University core courses
*All Muslim students are required to register for SEPI. Non-Muslim students may take either SEPI or PLE.Section
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H4
13
4
6
4
3
6
1
4112
41
12
20
12
9
18
4
12825
21
33
37
12
128Course category CoursesCredit
hoursCoursesCredit
hoursCategoryRequired coursesRequired courses
University Core
coursesCompulsory
Requirements9
7
410
11+
Project
41+
ProjectGeneral Courses
Discipline-Speciﬁc
Foundation CoursesMathematics
Core courses
Mathematics
Electives
Science Core
coursesMajor Courses, including
Research Project
Elective Courses
within the MajorUniversity
Breadth courses
Restricted
Electives
Free Electives
Research Project
Total86 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Computational Finance
Modern Algebra l (Galois Theory & Applications)
Modern Algebra ll (Commutative Rings & Fields)
Measure Theory l
Measure Theory ll
Operations Research l
Operations Research ll
Scientiﬁc Computing for Linear PDE’s.
Introduction to Differential Topology
Financial Engineering
Geometry-l
Geometry-ll
Abstract Algebra II
Financial Mathematics
Financial Analysis ll
Electrodynamics and Special Relativity
Algebraic Quantum Theory
Introduction to Quantum Field Relativity
Introduction to Scientiﬁc Computing
Time Series Analysis
Introduction to Data Mining
More optionsMTS442
MTS443
MTS444
MTS445
MTS446
MTS447
MTS448
MTS414
MTS452
MTS453
MTS4xx
MTS4xx
MTS413
MTS5xx
MTS412
PHY4xx
PHY4xx
PHY4xx
MTS4xx
MTS4xx
MTS4xx
MTS-3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3-
MTS413
MTS431
-
-
-
-
MTS413
MTS451
MTS441
-
-
MTS305
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-B. Mathematics core courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Calculus-l
Mathematical Logic & Sets Theory
Calculus-ll
Linear Algebra
Mathematical Statistics and Probability
Advanced Calculus
Introduction to Differential Equations
Mathematical Methods
Numerical Analysis
Statistical Modeling
Abstract Algebra
Analysis
Geometry & Topology
Final Year Project (Mathematics)MTS101
MTS211
MTS232
MTS203
MTS2xx
MTS242
MTS241
MTS3xx
MTS306
MTS202
MTS305
MTS-xxx
MTS451
MTS4713
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
4-
-
MTS101
-
-
MTS232
MTS101
MTS232
MTS102
MTS203
MTS341
MTS341
-
C. Mathematics electives courses
Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
Numerical Solutions of PDE
Integral Equations
Advanced Numerical Analysis l
Advanced Numerical Analysis ll
Differential Geometry
Stochastic Processes
Fluid Dynamics l
Fluid Dynamics ll
Financial Mathematics with a computational approachMTS431
MTS432
MTS433
MTS434
MTS435
MTS304
MTS437
MTS438
MTS441MTS203,
MTS2043
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3MTS414
MTS303
MTS414
MTS433
MTS231
-
-
-87 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
D. Science core courses
Introduction to Programming
Mechanics
Electricity & Magnetism and Waves
Data Structures
Introduction to Quantum Mechanics
Design & Analysis of AlgorithmsCSE141
PHYxxx
PHYxxx
CSE247
PHYxxx
CSE317-
-
MTS101
CSE141
-
CSE2474
3
3
4
3
4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse title
1
2
3
4
5
6S.No
E. University breadth requirement:
(4 Courses)
* To be selected from other schools with at least one course from each school.
F. Mathematics electives specialized groups*:
*All these courses are Mathematics electives and can be used to fulﬁll 
Mathematics elective requirements. The grouping is only made to help students 
build their strength in a particular specialty and to specify the requirements to 
earn a speciﬁc concentration on the transcript.
Mathematical Physics:
- Quantum Mechanics II
- Advanced Quantum Mechanics
- Introduction to Quantum Field Theory
- Electrodynamics and Special Relativity
- Quantum Information
- Statistical Mechanics
- Algebraic Quantum Theory
- General Relativity
- Computational Physics
- Stochastic Processes in Physics
Computational Mathematics
- Introduction to Scientiﬁc Computing
- Numerical Solutions of PDE
- Scientiﬁc Computing for Linear PDE’s
- Computational Physics
- Computational Quantum Field Theory- Monte-Carlo Methods
- Financial Mathematics with a computational approach
- Scientiﬁc Computing for Linear PDE’s
- Computational Physics
- Computational Quantum Field Theory
- Monte-Carlo Methods
- Financial Mathematics with a computational approach
- Financial Mathematics
- Operations Research
- Computational Finance
Data and Statistics:
- Introduction to Data Science
- Introduction to Data Mining
- Bayesian Statistics
- Stochastic Processes
- Time Series Analysis
- Econometrics
- Applied Multivariate Statistics
- Simulation and Computational Statistics
- Machine Learning
- Neural Networks
G. Free electives/concentration/minor declaration 
policy in BS (Mathematics) program
Free elective courses facilitate interdisciplinary study and provide a broader vision 
to the students. In the BS (Mathematics) program, students can (optionally) earn 
a concentration on their transcripts according to the following plan.
Computer Science
(3 additional courses with CS code, 300 level and beyond, apart from the CS 
required courses that are part of the core)
Data Analytics
(3 additional courses from Data and Statistics Stream, 300 level and beyond, 
apart from the one required course from this stream that is counted as a 
restricted elective)
Physics
(3 additional courses from Mathematical Physics Stream, 300 level and beyond, 
apart from the one required course from this stream that is counted as a 
restricted elective)
Concentration / minor will not be mentioned on the degree; however, they will be 
shown on the mark sheet.88 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
H. Final year Mathematics project. One ﬁnal
year project of 4 credit hoursNote: It is not mandatory for a student to select a concentration/minor in a BS 
(Mathematics) Program. They can choose courses from other ﬁelds of study 
apart from the ones mentioned above as a free elective for the completion of 
their degrees.
Concentration is declared at the time of graduation by submitting the 
appropriate forms
Semester-wise sequence of courses
MTS101 3 - Calculus-I 1Mathematics
Core
-PHYxxx 3 - Mechanics 2Science
Core
SSC151
MTS2113 Pakistan Studies 3University
Core
- 3Mathematical Logic
& Set Theory4Mathematics
Core
SSC101 - 3 Critical Reading and Writing 5University
CoreSemester 1 FreshmanCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeMTS232 3 - Calculus-Il 1Mathematics
Core
-PHYxxx 3 -Electricity, Magnetism
& Waves2Science
Core
MTS203
HUM2033 Linear Algebra 3Mathematics
Core
- 3 Speech communication 4University
Core
CSE141 - 4 Introduction to programming 5Science
CoreSemester-2Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MTS242 3 MTS232 Advanced Calculus 1Mathematics
Core
MTS101PHYxxx 3 -Mathematical Statistics &
Probability2Science
Core
MTS241 3Introduction to Differential
Equations3Mathematics
Core
3 University Breadth 4University
Core
SSC301 /
HUM357- 3Islamic Scholarly Tradition 
Or Philosophy, Logic, 
and Ethics*5Science
CoreSemester-3 SophomoreCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MTSxxx 3 - Mathematical Methods 1Mathematics
Core
PHYxxx 3 -Introduction to
Quantum Mechanics2Science
Core
MTSxxx
MTS3063 Statistical Modeling 3Mathematics
Core
MTS232 3 Numerical Analysis 4Mathematics
Core
CSE241 CSE141 4 Data Structures 5Science
CoreSemester-4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type89 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
MTS305 3 MTS203 Abstract Algebra 1Mathematics
Core
-MTSxxx 3 MTS242 Analysis 2Mathematics
Core
MTSxxx
CSE3173Computational Mathematics
Elective3 Elective
- 3Design & Analysis of
Algorithms4Science
Core
MTSxxx - 3 Mathematics Elective-I 5 ElectiveSemester-5 JuniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MTSxxx 3 -Mathematical
Physics Elective1 Elective
-MTSxxx 3 - Data and Statistics Elective 2 Elective
MTS451
MTS4513 Geometry & Topology 3Mathematics
Core Course
- 3 Mathematics Elective-II 4 Elective
MTSxxx - 3 University Breadth 5University
Breadth
CourseSemester-6Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
typeMTSxxx 3 - Mathematics Elective III 1 Elective
-MTSxxx 3 - Mathematics Elective IV 2 Elective
MTSxxx 3 University Breadth 3University
Breadth
- 3 Free Elective 4 Elective
SSC101 - 3 Free Elective 5 Elective
MTSxxx Final Year Project ProjectSemester-7 SeniorCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
- Free Elective 1 Elective
-- Free Elective 2 Elective
Free Elective 3Elective
- Free Elective 4 Elective
- University Breadth 5University
Breadth
MTSxxx Final Year Project ProjectSemester-8Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type90 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Computer Science
The Department of Computer Science at IBA, under the School of Mathematics 
and Computer Science (SMCS) is an exciting place to learn about the latest 
developments in Computer Science as well as to perform research with a high 
social impact. The MS program comprises of 4 tracks, each completely aimed at 
a particular ﬁeld of specialization in Computer Science. The diverse backgrounds 
of students that come from various ﬁelds of study into this program require a 
customized and tailored approach towards building the relevant fundamentals 
for each track. Moreover, the curriculum has been designed so that it is at par 
with IEEE/Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) guidelines. This ensures 
that the tracks do not lose relevance in the wake of a rapidly changing landscape 
of computing technologies. The potential of this program in terms of imparting 
useful advanced computing skills and professional growth is measured by the 
readiness of the job market and advanced learning schools in absorbing 
graduates. The curriculum design ensures that the graduates can creatively ﬁnd 
technology-based solutions, think critically and analyze systems and emerging 
problems  independently.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
The minimum duration of the program is 2 years, comprising 4 semesters. Total 
credit hours are 30.
Required courses
The Master of Science Computer Science (MSCS) program has two basic 
categories: MS with Thesis and MS without Thesis. In both categories, the 
student should complete 30 credit hours. In MS with Thesis, the student needs to 
complete 18 credit hours to be eligible for taking MS Thesis I (research work) and 
MS Thesis II (thesis work) of 3 credit hours each over two semesters. In MS 
without Thesis, the student needs to complete 24 credit hours to register for the 
MS Project, which is a one semester, 3 credit hour implementation of a solution 
to solve an industrial problem related to any domain of computer science.
In the MS Thesis, the student is required to discover an innovative algorithm, 
methodology, framework, entity, or an application, which is clearly 
distinguishable from the state-of-the-art research. Then, the student 
implements this innovation and attempts to demonstrate that it works or 
performs better or at least at par with current research trends. Finally, the 
student will attempt to publish these ﬁndings in a conference, workshop, symposium or journal paper. In the MS Project, the student implements a 
small-scale product, software, API, solution or similar entity to preferably address 
a current industrial need or requirement. The MS Project can also implement an 
innovative and unique idea of the student or supervisor which might become 
useful for the industry later. For more information,
visit: https://cs.iba.edu.pk/msthesisproject/.
The coursework may be taken from more than one of the 4 specialization tracks, 
with a student required to take a minimum of one course from each track with 
no limit on the maximum number of courses per track. Each track has its own set 
of prerequisites which are usually BS-level Computer Science courses. MS 
students may also take courses at the PhD (600) level for credit.
The breakdown of credit hours for both
MSCS is as follows:
MS with Thesis
 CS electives
MS Thesis-I
MS Thesis-Il
Total1
2
38
Equivalent to
1 course3
3
3
-Credit hours
24
3
3
30Total Course Course category
Equivalent to
1 course
10
MS without Thesis
CS electives
MS Project
Total1
29
Equivalent to
1 course3
3
30Credit hours
27
3
30Total Course Course category
1091 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
List of specialization tracksMSCS has the following 4 tracks, respective 
courses in each track are listed below (each course 
has its pre-requisites and is subject to the 
instructor’s consent)
Required to take minimum one
course - no limit on maximum coursesCriteria Tracks Specialization
1 AI/Intelligent Systems (Track-AI)
Required to take minimum one
course - no limit on maximum courses2Information Systems and Software
Engineering (Track-ISSE)
Required to take minimum one
course - no limit on maximum courses3Network Centric Computing/
Systems (Track-NCC)
Required to take minimum one
course - no limit on maximum courses4 Theory (Track-Theory)
Track-AI courses
Advanced Data Warehousing
Big Data Analytics
Bioinformatics Algorithms
Computational Intelligence
Computer Vision
Data and Information Visualization
Data Science Product Development
Deep Learning
Image Processing
Machine Learning-I
Machine Learning-II
Mathematics for Data Science
Natural Language Processing
Probabilistic Reasoning
Semantic Web
Social Network Analysis
Text AnalyticsCourse title Tracks Course code
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17MIS552
CSE668
CSE607
CSE659
CSE660
CSE510
CSE679
CSE669
CSE559
CSE602
CSE603
CSE601
CSE574
CSE655
CSE661
CSE670
CSE674Track-ISSE courses
Advance Human Comp Interaction
Advanced E-Commerce
Digital Business Transformation
Enterprise Integration
Information Industry Structure and Competitive Strategy
Information Retrieval and Web Search - I
Information Retrieval and Web Search - II
Knowledge Management and e-learning Systems
Logistics and Supply Chain Management
Mobile Marketing Strategies
Operations and Technology Management
Requirements Engineering
Research Methodology
Research Methods in IS
Software Project Management
Software Quality Assurance
Software Systems Engineering
Usability EngineeringCourse title Tracks Course code
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18CSE575
MIS565
CSE570
MIS503
MIS513
CSE665
CSE666
CSE658
MIS550
MIS553
MIS502
CSE567
CSE640
MIS601
CSE503
CSE566
CSE564
CSE576
92 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
 Track-NCC courses
Advanced Computer Networks
Cloud Security
Computer Comm Network & Simulation
Cyber Security Operations
Essentials of Information Security
Internet of Things
Software Deﬁned Networking
Wireless Sensor Networks
WSN Protocols and ApplicationsCourse title Course code
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9ICT511
CSE550
ICT651
CSE582
CSE580
CSE565
CSE675
ICT659
ICT662
Track-Theory courses
Bioinformatics Algorithms
Combinatorial Optimization
Computational Complexity Theory
Essentials of Theoretical Computer Science
Introduction to Algorithms
Parallel Processing
Programming Quantum Computers
Quantum Computer Science
Research Topics in Quantum Computing
Theoretical Foundations of ISCourse title Course code
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10CSE607
CSE654
CSE581
CSE657
CSF501
CSE662
CSE527
CSE517
CSE680
MIS651
93 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Data Science
The ﬁeld of data science lies at the intersection of machine learning, probability, 
statistics, linear algebra and big data analytics. Offered by the School of 
Mathematics and Computer Science (SMCS), the MS in Data Science (MSDS) 
program prepares students to extract valuable insights from data through a 
unique and comprehensive methodology. The program is designed for students 
who want to begin or advance their careers in the ﬁeld of data science. It provides 
a powerful base in subjects including statistical modeling, probabilistic 
reasoning, machine learning, management of massive data sets, data 
visualization, and software engineering. The program targets both CS and STEM 
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) students and prepares 
them to apply the knowledge of data science to a wide range of corporate 
domains. Non-CS/SE/IT students are required to take non-credit foundation-level 
courses in algorithms, data management and application development. These 
courses prepare them for the core and more advanced data science courses 
alongside students with a CS, IT or SE background. The MSDS core courses 
strengthen the students’ understanding of mathematical concepts that form 
the basis of machine learning and statistical modeling along with both 
theoretical and hands-on skills in big data management and analytics. Students 
can opt from a range of electives including, but not limited to deep learning, text 
analytics, computer vision, business intelligence, time series analysis, 
information retrieval and social network analysis. The potential of this program in 
terms of imparting useful and advanced data science skills and professional 
growth is measured by the readiness of the job market and advanced learning 
schools in absorbing graduates. The curriculum design ensures that the 
graduates can creatively ﬁnd technology-based solutions, think critically and 
analyze systems and emerging problems independently. Hence, the vision of 
MSDS is to train students to create an impact of data science in the local and 
international industries.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
For the non-CS/IT/SE students who take the foundation-level courses, the total 
minimum duration is 2.5 years (with a total of 5 semesters). For the CS/IT/SE 
students, the total minimum duration is 2 years (with a total of 4 semesters). 
MSDS courses are not offered in the two-month long summer semester.Required courses
The MSDS program has two basic categories: MS with Thesis and MS without 
Thesis. In MS with Thesis, the student needs to complete 18 credit hours to take 
MS Thesis I (research work) and MS Thesis II (thesis work) of 3 credit hours each 
over two semesters. In MS without Thesis, the student needs to complete 24 
credit hours to implement the MS Project, a one semester, 3 credit hour 
implementation of an industrial solution to solve a data science problem.
In the MS Thesis, the student is required to discover an innovative algorithm, 
methodology, framework, entity, or an application, which is clearly 
distinguishable from the state-of-the-art research. Then, the student 
implements this innovation and attempts to demonstrate that it works or 
performs better or at least at par with current research trends. Finally, the 
student will attempt to publish these ﬁndings in a conference, workshop, 
symposium or journal paper. In the MS Project, the student implements a 
small-scale product, software, API, solution or similar entity to preferably address 
some current industrial need or requirement. The MS Project can also 
implement some innovative and unique ideas of the student or supervisor which 
might become useful for the industry later. For more information,
visit: https://cs.iba.edu.pk/msthesisproject/
Program Structure
The MSDS program is for 4 semesters with a total of 39 credit hours. The following 
struture will be followed for MS with Thesis and MS without Thesis:
MS with Thesis
Foundation courses
Core courses
Electives
Thesis (MS Thesis I and MS Thesis II)
TotalA
B
C
D3
3
5
2
139
9
15
6
39Credit hours Course Section Course title
MS without Thesis
Foundation courses
Core courses
Electives
MS Project
TotalA
B
C
D3
3
6
1
139
9
18
3
39Credit hours Course Section Course title
The breakdown of foundation and core courses is as follows:
Introduction to Algorithms
Database Management
Application Development1
2
33
3
3-
-
-Pre-requisite Credit hours SectionFoundation courses
(For students with non-CS background)
CSF501
CSF505
CSF510Course codeThe potential list of offered electives is as follows:Mathematics for Data Science CSE601 3Clear all
foundation
courses/
CS-background1
Machine Learning - I (Supervised Learning) CSE602 3Clear all
foundation
courses/
CS-background2
Big Data Analytics CSE668 3Clear all
foundation
courses/
CS-background3Core courses
Probabilistic Reasoning CSE655 3Maths for
DS, ML-11
Computational Intelligence CSE659 3Maths for
DS, ML-12
Computer Vision CSE660 3Maths for
DS, ML-13
Computational Intelligence CSE659 3Maths for
DS, ML-14
Information Retrieval CSE665 3Maths for
DS, ML-15
Deep Learning CSE669 3Maths for
DS, ML-16
Social Network Analysis CSE670 3Maths for
DS, ML-17
Deep Learning CSE673 3Maths for
DS, ML-18
Text Analytics CSE674 3Maths for
DS, ML-19
Machine Learning-II (Unsupervised Learning) CSE603 3Maths for
DS, ML-110
Data and Information Visualization CSE510 3Completion of
all core courses11
Internet of Things CSE565 3Completion of
all core courses12
Cyber Security Operations CSE582 3Completion of
all core courses13
Cloud Security CSE550 3Completion of
all core courses14
Research Methodology CSE640 3Completion of
all core courses15PrerequisiteCourse
codeElectives
(More courses may be added to this list)Credit
hours94 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-2495 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
The semester-wise breakup along with
credit hours as follows:Note:-
- BS (CS/SE/IT) graduates are exempted from the foundation courses. For other candidates, the interview panel will 
decide which foundation courses are they exempted from.
- In each academic year, students with non-CS backgrounds will be inducted only in the Fall semester, and students 
with a CS background with be inducted only in the Spring semester.
For further details, please email at:
msds-queries@iba.edu.pk or msds@iba.edu.pkIntroduction to Algorithms
Database Management
Application Development1
2
3Foundation
Foundation
FoundationCourse type Semester 0 (Foundation courses)
3
3
3Credit hours
Mathematics for Data Science
Machine Learning - I (Supervised Learning)
Big Data Analytics1
2
3Core
Core
CoreCourse type Semester 1
3
3
3Credit hours
Elective 1
Elective 2
Elective 31
2
3Elective
Elective
ElectiveCourse type Semester 2
3
3
3Credit hoursElective 4
Elective 5
Elective 6 or MS Thesis-I1
2
3Elective
Elective
Elective / ThesisCourse type Semester 3
3
3
3Credit hours
MS Project or MS Thesis-II 1 Project / ThesisCourse type Semester 4
3Credit hours
96 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Master of Science (MS) Mathematics
MS in Mathematics aims to provide a thorough background in theory, 
quantitative methods, and applications commensurate with international 
standards, offering the opportunity for more specialized training in selected 
areas of pure and applied mathematics.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to pages 08-09 .
Duration
The minimum duration of the program is 2 years.
Part-time students
Students can also join the program on a part-time basis (i.e., those students who 
are not offered or opting for ﬁnancial assistance) on the condition that they 
cannot register in more than 3 courses in semesters.
Requirements for the award of
MS Mathematics degree
a) Complete 30 credit hours that include 24 credit hours (8 courses) of 
coursework and 6 credit hours of thesis.
b) Six courses (mentioned in the list) at the 500 level are core courses that every 
student must do.
c) In addition, a student must do two electives to be chosen from the list given 
at the 500 level. A student can also choose a PhD Mathematics course as an 
elective by acquiring approval from the Board of Studies Mathematical 
Sciences.
d) The eligibility for doing an MS thesis is a CGPA of 3.00.
e) Students who do not qualify for the eligibility criteria for doing an MS thesis 
will be required to do two additional courses (6 credit hours in addition) and 
graduate with an MS degree (without thesis). Such MS graduates would not 
be eligible for doing a PhD Mathematics in the future from IBA.f) Public defense of the MS thesis and completion of the degree will be 
governed as per IBA’s policy.
For further details, visit: www.mathematics.iba.edu.pk
Core units
Elective units
Literature survey
Research work units
Total18
6
3
3
306
2
1
1
10Course category Courses Credit hoursRequired courses
Core units
Elective units
Literature survey
Research work units
Total18
12
0
0
306
4
0
0
10Course category Courses Credit hoursMS without Thesis
Semester-wise sequence of courses
MTS511 3 - Advanced Real Analysis 1 Core
-MTS513 3 - Topics in Algebra 2 Core
MTS576
MTSxxx3 Scientiﬁc Computing I of PDE’s 3 Core
- 3 Elective I 4 ElectiveSpring SemesterCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type97 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
*The departmental Board of Studies is authorized to introduce any new course added to the above list as and when 
required. Note: Any course of 600 level of Mathematics could be treated as an MS Mathematics elective.MTS508 3 -Probability and
Mathematical Statistics1 Core
-MTS562 3 - Topics in Number Theory 2 Core
MTS575
MTSxxx3 Topology and Geometry 3 Core
- 3 Elective Il 4 ElectiveFall SemesterCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
MTS699 6 -MS Thesis
(With literature survey)1 ElectiveSemester 3 and 4Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourse
type
Elective coursesAlgebraic Geometry I
Scientiﬁc Computing and Software
Algebraic Cycles I
Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry
Exploratory Data Analysis
Mathematical Physics I -
Statistical Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
Statistical Machine Learning
Galois Theory
Smooth ManifoldsMTS549
MTS551
MTS553
MTS557
MTS561
MTS565
MTS569
MTS573
MTS577
MTS5813
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
33
MTS514
MTS521
MTS513
MTS513
-
-
-
-
MTS513
MTS510Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourses
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22S.No
Non Linear Dynamics and Chaos
Measure Theory and Integration
Topics in Commutative Algebra
Scientiﬁc Computing
Stochastic Processes II
Stochastic Differential Equations
Topics in Commutative Algebra
Integral Equations-I
Mathematical Astronomy
Homological Algebra
Computational Algebraic GeometryMTS507
MTS512
MTS514
MTS521
MTS525
MTS529
MTS514
MTS533
MTS537
MTS539
MTS541MTS203,
MTS 2413
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourses
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11S.No
MTS512
MTS513
-
MTS304
MTS304
MTS513
-
-
MTS513
MTS513
MTS511,
MTS513,
MTS6163 MTS545 Applicable Modern Geometry I 1298 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
PhD Computer Science Courses*
PhD in Computer Science aims to carry out cutting-edge research in the ﬁeld of 
Computer Science, gaining recognition for it and maintaining social and 
corporate networks in the ﬁeld of study. The IBA Department of Computer 
Science offers PhD programs in the following areas: Artiﬁcial Intelligence and 
Cognitive Robotics, Computer Vision, Bioinformatics, Wireless and Mobile 
Communications, Social Computing, Operations Research, Management 
Information System, Numerical Analysis and Computing, Multimedia and Web, 
and Human Computer Interaction.
The PhD-CS program aims at encouraging graduate students who can make a 
signiﬁcant contribution to their ﬁeld through original research. By being a part of 
this program, students will get an opportunity to establish linkages with 
international researchers, publish scholarly articles and attend reputed 
conferences worldwide in the selected discipline. Students’ quantitative and 
qualitative research capabilities will be polished and interdisciplinary research 
along with interaction with the local industry will always be encouraged.
The PhD-CS program motivates independence and originality of thought in the 
research process. The program requires a residency of at least two years, where 
students are expected to complete a specially designed program comprising 
advanced courses. During the residency program, students are expected to 
attach themselves to a supervisor in their ﬁeld of specialization. 
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to page 10.
Course Work 1,2
DissertationA
B18
12Credit hours Program
6
-Courses
Rules:
 It is recommended that the coursework should be completed during the ﬁrst 
3 semesters after admission.
 Students can take a maximum of 4 courses (12 credit hours) in each semester.Course titleCourse
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisite
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3Machine Learning – I
Machine Learning – II
Bioinformatics Algorithms
Advanced Analysis of Algorithms
Combinatorial Optimization
Probabilistic Reasoning
Computational Intelligence
Semantic Web
Parallel Processing
Information Retrieval and Web Search-I
Information Retrieval and Web Search-II
Big Data Analytics
Deep Learning
Computer Communication Network and Simulation
Computer Communication Network and Simulation II
Wireless Sensor Networks
Advanced Topics In Wireless Sensor Networks
WSN Protocols And Applications
Theoretical Foundations of IS
Advanced Research Topics In IS
Advanced Theoretical Concepts in ISSocial Network Analysis CSE670 3CSE602
CSE603
CSE607
CSE651
CSE654
CSE655
CSE659
CSE661
CSE662
CSE665
CSE666
CSE668
CSE669
ICT651
ICT654
ICT659
ICT660
ICT662
MIS651
MIS652
MIS653 
-
-
-
-
-
CSE665
-
-
-
CSE248, MTS102
ICT651
ICT659
CSE248
-
-
MIS651
-
-
-CSE141,
CSE248,
 MTS102
*It is a partial list of courses99 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
PhD Mathematics
PhD in Mathematics aims to polish an individual’s skills of using Mathematics as 
a compact language to describe problems in any area. This enables them to 
theoretically expand the frontiers to create new and formerly unknown avenues 
in this discipline.
Eligibility criteria
For the eligibility criteria, refer to page 10.
Duration
The minimum duration of the program is 4 years and the maximum time 
allowed is 8 years.
Other rules
 A PhD student must spend at least the ﬁrst two years in the IBA as a full-time 
PhD scholar. Failing in doing so will result in termination from the program.
 PhD students will be required to do six courses (chosen from the list below) at 
600 level as suggested by the research supervisor and/or Board of Studies 
Mathematical Sciences.
Courses
The Board of Studies Mathematical Sciences is authorized to introduce any new 
courses added to the following list as and when required. On successful 
completion of the course work with a CGPA of at least 3.00, the candidate 
qualiﬁes to work on the PhD dissertation. Failing to achieve this qualiﬁcation, the 
candidate would be allowed to improve his/her CGPA by doing two of their 
courses again. In view of the candidate’s request and recommendation of the 
Board of Studies Mathematical Sciences, the candidate may do any other two 
courses to bring their CGPA to the required level.
Comprehensive test
The comprehensive examination would be taken anytime in the ﬁrst two 
years of PhD.Disqualiﬁcation
If the candidate fails to qualify for working on a PhD dissertation, they may be 
awarded an MS degree on the recommendation of the supervisor/Board of 
Studies Mathematical Sciences.
Defense of PhD thesis proposal and thesis
PhD thesis proposal would have to be defended in front of two national 
examiners (selected and approved by BOS and BASR). Public defense of the PhD 
thesis and completion of the degree will commence after the thesis has been 
examined by two foreign external examiners (who will be selected as per the HEC 
policy).
For further details, visit: www.mathematics.iba.edu.pk
List of courses
Numerical Treatment of P.D.E.
Financial Mathematics
Computational Astronomy
Applicable Modern Geometry Il
Algebraic Geometry II
Algebraic Cycles II
Algebraic Curves
Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear SystemsMTS621
MTS625
MTS637
MTS645
MTS649
MTS653
MTS655
MTS6563
3
3
3
3
3
3MTS515
MTS537
MTS545
MTS549
MTS553
MTS366
MTS557
MTS525Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourses
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
https://mathematics.iba.edu.pk/100 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Numerical Treatment of P.D.E.
Financial Mathematics
Computational Astronomy
Applicable Modern Geometry Il
Algebraic Geometry II
Algebraic Cycles II
Algebraic Curves
Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems
Poly logarithms
Timescale calculus
Computational Fluid Dynamics
Multivariate Statistical Analysis
Analysis on Manifolds
Plane Curves and Singularities
Mathematical Physics II
Advanced Topology
General Relativity and Cosmology
Scientiﬁc Programming
Convex Analysis
Algebraic Number Theory
Monomial Algebra
Topics in Homological Algebra
Computational Continuum MechanicsMTS621
MTS625
MTS637
MTS645
MTS649
MTS653
MTS655
MTS656
MTS657
MTS658
MTS659
MTS661
MTS662
MTS664
MTS665
MTS666
MTS667
MTS668
MTS669
MTS670
MTS671
MTS672
MTS6733
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3MTS515 
MTS537
MTS545
MTS549
MTS553 
MTS366
MTS557 
MTS525 
MTS565
MTS451
MTS514
MTS539
MTS515
MTS537
MTS545
MTS549
MTS553
MTS366
MTS557 
MTS525
MTS565
MTS451Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourses
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23S.No
MTS242,
MTS203 Algebraic Topology
Category Theory
Quantum Mechanics I
Special Relativity
De Rham Cohomology
Topics of Special Interest I
Topics of Special Interest II
Topics in Homological Algebra
Computational Algebraic TopologyMTS674
MTS606
MTS675
MTS676
MTS677
MTS691
MTS692
MTS621
MTS6813
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3MTS514
MTS539
MTS 242,
MTS 203Course
codeCredit
hoursPre- 
requisiteCourses
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32S.No
MTS515
MTS537
MTS545
MTS549
MTS553
101 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Students enrolled  in Spring 2023
Undergraduate
Programs EnrollmentsMale
studentsFemale
students
Bachelor of Business Administration
BS Accounting and Finance
BS Computer Science
BS Economics
BS Economics & Mathematics
BS Social Sciences & Liberal Arts
BS Mathematics
Total1016
919
639
456
220
344
19
3613562
632
472
256
122
100
12
2156454
287
167
200
98
244
7
1457
Graduate
Programs EnrollmentsMale
studentsFemale
students
MBA - Evening
MBA - Morning
Executive MBA
MS Computer Science
MS Development Studies
MS Data Science
MS Economics
MS Finance
MS Islamic Banking & Finance
MS Management
MS Mathematics
MS Marketing
Total309
155
207
62
18
75
27
18
40
29
23
8
971248
90
166
45
9
55
17
15
30
6
13
0
69461
65
41
17
9
20
10
3
10
23
10
8
277
Postgraduate
Programs EnrollmentsMale
studentsFemale
students
PhD Computer Science
PhD Economics
PhD Mathematics
Total33
20
22
7515
15
15
4518
5
7
30
Total
4659Undergraduat e
Progr amsGraduat e Programs Doctoral Programs
3613 971 75 
Male Female Male Female Male Female
2156 1457 694 277 45 30
Total Male
Students 2895 1764Total F emale
Students
Male Students 62% Female Students 38%Calendar of Holidays
Death anniversary of late Zulﬁqar Ali Bhutto**
Urs of Shah Abdul Latif Bhitai (14 Safar)**
Death anniversary of late Benazir Bhutto**April 04, 2024
August 19, 2024
December 27, 2024Local/Optional holidays 2024Kashmir day
Pakistan day
Eid-ul-Fitr*
Labour day
Eid-ul-Azha*
Ashura*
Independence Day
Eid Milad-un-Nabi*
Birth anniversary of Quaid-e-Azam/ChristmasFebruary 05, 2024
March 23, 2024
April 10, 11 & 12, 2024
May 01, 2024
June 17, 18 & 19, 2024
July 16 & 17, 2024
August 14, 2024
September 16, 2024
December 25, 2024Gazetted/Public holidays 2024Urs of Shah Abdul Latif Bhitai (14 Safar)**
Death anniversary of late Benazir Bhutto**August 31, 2023
December 27, 2023Local/Optional holidays 2023Ashura*
Independence Day
Eid Milad-un-Nabi*
Birth anniversary of Quaid-e-Azam/ChristmasJuly 28 to 29, 2023
August 14, 2023
September 28, 2023
December 25, 2023Gazetted/Public holidays 2023
* Subject to moon sighting
** Subject to receiving notiﬁcation from the Government of Sindh103 PROGRAM
ANNOUNCEMENT 2023-24
Excerpts of the academic calendar 2023-24
August 16 to 19, 2023
August 21, 2023 to
December 14, 2023
December 02, 2023
January 14, 2024
January 15, 2024 to
May 13, 2024
June 12, 2024 to
July 31, 2024
August 15 to 18, 2024
August 19, 2024Fall Semester 2023
Convocation 2023
Spring Semester 2024
Summer Semester 2024
Fall Semester 2024Orientation Fall 2023
Orientation Spring 2024
Orientation Fall 2024
Main Campus
University Enclave, University Road,
Karachi - 75270 Pakistan
UAN: 111-422-422
Fax : 92-21-99261508
City Campus
Plot # 68 and 88 Garden / Kiyani Shaheed Road,
Karachi - 74400 Pakistan
UAN: 111-422-422
Fax : 92-21-38103008
www.iba.edu.pkinfo@iba.edu.pk
Disclaimers:*The Institute of Business Administration, Karachi issues its literature as a general 
guide only, and not as a contract. The Institute reserves the right to modify or alter, as necessary, 
any of its published information and programs without notice.**This publication is a live 
document. More content may be added as new information and policies pertaining to Fall 2020 
and Spring 2021 academic sessions may change as the COVID-19 situation develops.For the most 
up to date information, please visit our website: www.iba.edu.pk
https://www.iba.edu.pk/
https://www.iba.edu.pk/