1
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-2424) (2023-HANDBOOKSTUDEN T UU2
 3
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 ABOUT THIS
 HANDBOOK 
CONTENTSThe Student Handbook          
of the Institute of Business 
Administration (IBA)  
Karachi is designed as a 
roadmap to assist you in 
navigating the important 
codes, policies, practices, 
resources, support, and 
services for the student 
body at the IBA Karachi. 
This Handbook also  
provides information  
about students’  
responsibilities and rights 
regarding their behavior     
as a member of the IBA 
fraternity and the use of 
IBA’s facilities and  
privileges. As an IBA  
student, it is your  
responsibility to ensure 
that you read it carefully to 
help acclimatize you to the 
IBA Karachi.
The Handbook should be 
read in conjunction with the Students’ Code of 
Conduct. The provisions of 
the Student Handbook are 
not to be regarded as an 
irrevocable contract  
between the student and 
the Institution. The  
information in this  
Handbook is current as up 
to date; however, the  
information presented in 
this Handbook is subject 
to change. The IBA  
reserves the right to make 
changes affecting  
admission procedures, 
tuition, fees, courses of 
instruction, programs of 
study, faculty listings, 
academic grading policies, 
and general regulations 
etc.
For any queries you can 
contact the relevant  
Offices mentioned in this 
Handbook.04 Definitions
05 About IBA
06 School of Business Studies
07 School of Economics and Social Sciences
08 School of Mathematics and Computer Science
09 Core Values 
10 Office of Student Affairs
14 Expected Student Conduct  
15 Jurisdiction and applicability
16 Regulatory Bodies and Offices
19 Reporting Misconduct -
 Office of Student Affairs
22 Appeal Procedure
24 Academic Conduct Guidelines
29 General Conduct Guidelines
39 Guidelines for Social Media Engagement
42 Cafeteria services
43 Medical and Emergency Services
44 Library
46 Computing and ICT Services
52 Career Development Center4
 5
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 About the Institute of Business
 Administration Karachi
The Institute of Business Administration (IBA) Karachi, with an established 68 years of legacy of 
imparting world-class education and cultivating thought leaders, is known as Pakistan’s 
premier business institution, recognized internationally with world-class faculty, specializing in 
diverse areas of study.
Over the years, IBA has transformed itself from a Business School to one of Pakistan’s most 
dynamic and prominent public sector institutions of higher learning.
IBA offers exceptional learning opportunities in academia, research and innovation. We hone and 
nurture our youth into effective leaders who transform the world with their progressive 
leadership.
IBA launched its three schools in 2020, namely, the School of Business Studies (SBS), the 
School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS) and the School of Mathematics and 
Computer Science (SMCS).l Population:
 IBA community, i.e., students, scholars, research advisors, project supervisors, professors, 
instructors, academic office bearers, parents and any individual involved in receiving/
imparting education.
l Academic Transaction:
 Regular classes; online classes; any manifestation of formal assessments such as (but not 
limited to) quizzes, tests, hourlies, midterms, final exams, projects, class assignments, take-
home assignments/homework etc.; attendance recording; TA assignments, RA 
assignments. 
l Academic Misconduct:
 Conduct that is deemed offensive/unethical/inappropriate by a majority of the population* 
in the context of academic transactions*.
l Offense:
 Any manifestation of academic misconduct*.
l On-and Off-site:
 On campus, at IBA-related events or activities (both on and off campus), IBA Hostels, IBA 
Buses and Shuttles, and any other IBA-related locations. 
l Plagiarism:
 Copying another individual’s intellectual work, with or without their permission, and 
without full acknowledgment of their contribution, and passing down as one’s own. 
l Cheating:
 Term attributed to a specific manifestation of plagiarism that occurs during formal 
assessments. Examples: Two students copying from one another; copying from electronic 
devices (excluding calculators and devices allowed through written permission by the 
instructor), covert proxy-writing exams, copying from paper chits, bringing banned 
devices to the exam hall (mobiles/tablets - unless allowed), bringing banned items (any 
paper/stationery with hand-written/printed inscription relevant to the assessment). 
Talking to other exam takers during exams. Borrowing of calculators without involving the 
invigilator. 
l Collusion:
 Term attributed to the unauthorized and unattributed help in graded intellectual work by 
others – must not be confused with collaboration, which is the authorized and attributed 
combined work of two or more individuals. 
l Personation:
 Term attributed to assumption of another person’s identity with a deceitful intent. In this 
context it refers to writing unauthorized proxy exams. DEFINITIONS
6
 7
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 School of
 Business Studies
The School of Business Studies (SBS) is one of our leading schools with the flagship BBA and 
MBA programs dating back to almost seven decades. The School is constitutive of four 
departments, viz, the Departments of Accounting and Law, Finance, Management, and 
Marketing.
Since its inception, IBA Karachi has built a strong reputation for being the leading business 
school in Pakistan, and to stay ahead, we keep evolving to the needs of society. With the 
establishment of SBS, we intend to further expand our programs with transformative curricula 
and provide students with an enriching learning experience with easy and regular access to 
industry leaders. At the SBS, we are committed to preparing innovative leaders who will add 
value to their stakeholders and the society at large.
Furthermore, the School’s initial Self Evaluation Report (iSER) has been accepted by the AACSB 
Global - Initial Accreditation Committee (IAC). AACSB is considered as the gold standard of 
accreditation in the business education.
 School of
 Economics and Social Sciences
The School of Economics and Social Sciences (SESS) is an amalgamation of two departments, 
two research centers, and four labs. Therefore, SESS includes the Department of Economics, 
the Department of Social Sciences and Liberal Arts (SSLA), the Center for Business and 
Economic Research (CBER), Population Research Center (PRC), Social Inequality Lab, Economic 
Growth and Forecasting Lab, Psychology Research and Testing Lab, and Karachi Urban Lab.
The Department of Economics is committed to excellence in research, undergraduate and 
graduate education. Two undergraduate programs, BS Economics and BS Economics & 
Mathematics equip students with theory, empirical investigation, and policy analysis skills. The 
Department of Social Sciences and Liberal Arts (SSLA) prepares students in a wide range of 
academic disciplines including Philosophy, History, Literature, Political Science, Urban Studies, 
Media Studies, Anthropology, and Development Studies. CBER and PRC acquaint students 
with research and prepare them to present research on national and international platforms.
SESS organizes numerous events and conferences throughout the year. These events are 
designed to enrich the learning experience and provide students with opportunities to engage 
with experts in various fields and expand their knowledge.
The School’s research-oriented environment encourages students to develop themselves as 
effective practitioners and scholars.
8
 9
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24
Vision
To be among the best learning institutions in Pakistan.
Mission
l To impart quality education in numerous educational fields to students selected on merit 
irrespective of ethnicity, gender, religion, or financial means.
l To provide a teaching and learning environment that encourages critical thinking, ethical 
conduct and effective decision making.
l To undertake original research that enriches teaching which benefits business, government 
and civil society.
Core Values
l Discipline - Discipline requires self-regulation and adherence to an established code of 
conduct. Discipline facilitates the smooth functioning of the institute and is essential for an 
IBA student.
l Creativity - Creativity breeds innovation which is critical for an institution to expand its 
frontiers. IBA students are encouraged to generate new ideas to attain their goals.
l Tolerance - Tolerance represents the ability and willingness to accept and coexist with other 
opinions and behaviors. Tolerance is an essential characteristic of successful individuals and 
societies.
l Integrity - Integrity suggests the quality of being honest and having strong moral principles. 
Integrity is crucial to the reputation of individual students as well as that of the IBA.
l Teamwork - Teamwork requires harmonizing individual efforts to achieve a common goal. 
Without teamwork, individual efforts can be wasted, and institutions can suffer. School of
 Mathematics and Computer Science
The School of Mathematics and Computer Science (SMCS) is one of the fastest growing 
schools for excellence in teaching and research of computer science in Pakistan. The 
SMCS has a qualified faculty comprising of experienced practitioners and researchers that 
enrich teaching, provide business consultancies, support startups, and prepare students 
for higher education and industry.
The School has state-of-the-art facilities focusing on undergraduate and graduate education. 
The research labs for Artificial Intelligence, Web Science, Big Data and Telecommunications 
allow computer science students to delve deep into the technological realm. In contrast, the 
mathematics programs offer a thorough background in pure and applied mathematics, 
ranging from high-performance computing to commutative algebra.
10
 11
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Office of Student Affairs has the following offices under its umbrella:
Office of Diversity, Accessibility, and Inclusion
The Office of Student Affairs believes and works on the premise that every student is unique, 
belonging to diverse backgrounds. It aims to create an inclusive environment, accepting of 
every individual’s different background and characteristics, and differences in perspective 
and demographics, which include race, age, religion, disability and gender, as well as skills, 
experiences, and abilities. It aims to eliminate discrimination, break down barriers, and 
facilitate and ensure equal opportunities and access for all students.
For more details, visit: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/odai/
For any queries, reach out to:
Email: odai@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 2451
Office of Student Societies and IBA Student Government
The Office of Student Societies (OSS) encourages students to discover new interests, 
participate in activities, build lifelong connections, and refine skills that enrich their life 
outside of academics. The Office manages the IBA Student Government (ISG) and IBA 
Student Clubs and Societies and facilitates them in executing smooth operations for their 
events, activities, and other programs. The OSS plays an integral part in the holistic 
development of students through various activities on and off campus.
IBA encourages student participation in diverse activities, having more than 30+ student 
clubs/societies at the institution; these clubs/societies are divided into curricular, cocurricular, 
and service clusters to enhance students’ skills and experience. The IBA-wide student 
Government (ISG) acts as a representative of the student body. The ISG oversees all events 
and activities organized by students, ensuring that they are in line with the IBA’s policies, 
Code of Conduct, vision, and values.
Read up on the rules, guidelines, and financial policies for Student Clubs & Societies:
https://osa.iba.edu.pk/policies-guideline
Familiarize yourself with the Guidelines for Using Social Media for ISG and Societies and Clubs: 
https://osa.iba.edu.pk/student-resources/guidelines-social-media-iba-student-government-
societies-and-clubs.pdf
Visit the OSS website for more details: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/oss/
For queries related to Student Clubs/Societies, please contact:
Email: Oss@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 1185, 2033	 Office	of
 Student Affairs
Become part of an engaging and diverse student experience!
The Office of Student Affairs (OSA) at IBA Karachi is dedicated to creating an engaging 
and diverse student experience for every student at the IBA Main and City campuses. The 
Office plays an integral role in community engagement, talent and skill development, and 
student leadership development. It provides students with opportunities to extend their 
passions, talents, and competencies beyond academia by participating in curricular, 
cocurricular, and service-oriented activities. The Office proactively responds and is 
adaptable to student- centric needs, and evolving trends and priorities.
Student Affairs is also committed to fostering a culture of inclusion, mutual respect, and 
acceptance with respect to diversity. It plays a pivotal role in promoting a safe, welcoming, and 
inclusive environment and campus life for students, and especially for those who may have 
disabilities or special needs – our job is to support students’ individual and group needs and to 
endorse the value of a diverse society.
To know more about the OSA, visit our website: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/
For any queries, reach out to:
Email: osa@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 2475, 2451
12
 13
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24International Resource Center
The International Resource Center (IRC) provides opportunities to students to extend their 
learning by complementing their academic experience with international exposure. The 
IRC team coordinates, collaborates, and partners with international universities to offer 
students exchange opportunities to facilitate and support them in going abroad for 
summer and semester exchange programs, conferences, international competitions, 
international learning opportunities and explore scholarship opportunities. The Center 
also facilitates students in issuing visa letters, English proficiency letters and NOCs for the 
semester exchange programs and summer schools.
Read up on Inbound and Outbound Semester Exchange Policy for Students                         
https://osa.iba.edu.pk/policies-guideline
Please visit the website to learn more about the IRC: https://osa.iba.edu.pk/irc/
For queries related to Semester Exchange Programs and Summer Schools, please contact
Email: internationaloffice@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 1207, 2452
Student Employment & Volunteering
Students are offered opportunities to work part-time on both campuses during the 
semester and the summer. They can be employed in various departments (administrative, 
academic, or support service departments). These can be both paid (student 
employment) or unpaid (volunteering). The number of work hours per week differ based 
on the nature of employment. Student Affairs also helps students in searching for 
volunteering opportunities outside IBA as well.
Student Leadership, Coaching & Peer Programs
To enrich the university experience, students can participate in leadership development, 
coaching, or peer programs that foster learning, growth, community development and 
peer support. These students can attend workshops, seminars, and programs that will 
build their skills to motivate, influence, and guide other students at IBA.Health and Wellness Center
The Health and Wellness Center at the IBA Karachi provides health care facilities to 
students with an aim to help them improve their physical and psycho-social well-being. 
Wellness Counseling addresses students’ emotional, psychological, social and behavioural 
concerns. It focuses on life stressors and problems that affect people individually and as a 
part of families, groups, and organizations. IBA believes that mental health of its students 
is just as important as their physical health and should be supported and prioritized.
The Health and Wellness Center at IBA provides multi-level mental health facilities for all 
students. For Wellness Counseling, please see the link below and make an appointment with 
our dedicated team of Clinical Psychologists/Wellness Counsellors and Psychiatrists by clicking 
on the available slots on our website.
Students are encouraged to visit the website: https://healthandwellnesscenter.iba.edu.pk/ or 
reach out to the Health and Wellness Center, Martin Dow.
Mr. Ahmad Ali
Wellness Counselor/
Clinical Psychologist
Email: ahmadali@iba.edu.pk
Tel: (021) 111-422-422 Ext: 3050Ms. Maria Faridun
Wellness Counselor/
Clinical Psychologist
Email: mfaridun@iba.edu.pk
Tel: (021) 111-422-422 Ext: 2453Ms. Humera Qutb
Wellness Counselor (Part time)/
Clinical Psychologist
Email: shqutb@iba.edu.pk
Tel: (021) 111-422-422 Ext: 305614
 15
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Expected
 Student Conduct
The IBA Karachi is a learning center where exchange and creation of ideas and new 
knowledge takes place. The IBA community is entitled to a reasonably quiet environment in 
the classrooms and on campus in general. The Institute expects all members to respect this 
right and to be aware of the impact of their activities on their fellow members. Disruptive 
behaviour which is in noncompliance to the listed rules and regulations is considered as a 
misconduct and must not be practiced in any circumstance. Students are expected to: 
l Present themselves as mature, law abiding and responsible persons.
l Refrain from subversive activities.
l Not indulge in activities that bring the Institute into disrepute.
l Treat all members of the IBA community with respect and dignity.
l Dress in a manner that does not violate the dress code policy outlined by IBA. 
l Not threaten or endanger the health, safety, or security of other individuals. 
l Refrain from causing any damage to the Institution’s property.
l Refrain from maligning and defaming any member of the IBA community on social media 
or otherwise.
Purpose
The IBA Karachi expects its students to conform to the highest standards of ethics and 
discipline, respect the rights of its members, and uphold the reputation of the Institute. The 
Code of Conduct provides a framework for strengthening discipline by identifying 
expectations, specifying the acts of misdemeanour and the nature of ensuing penalties.
Actions violating the Code of Conduct can result in disciplinary sanctions. Examples of 
disciplinary sanctions include, but are not limited to, fines, community service hours, or 
academic penalties, and can also result in dismissal from the Institute. A student dismissed 
for disciplinary reasons will not be considered for readmission. The tenets of the IBA Code of 
Conduct apply to all students.
Every student is responsible for understanding and abiding by the Code of Conduct. 
Ignorance of the code of conduct is not considered defense during disciplinary proceedings. 
Queries seeking clarifications regarding the Code of Conduct may be addressed to the 
Student Affairs Office.
 Jurisdiction
 and applicability
The disciplinary jurisdiction of the Code of Conduct extends to any misconduct by a student 
or student societies that occurs on campus facilities and in certain instances off campus, 
where students are representing the Institution.
On campus:  Misconduct by a student or student societies that occur on both IBA campuses 
and in IBA student facilities (for e.g., housing, shuttles, webinars, etc.)
Off campus:  Misconduct that occurs off campus while representing the IBA at an event or 
activity that is associated with or sponsored by the IBA or arranged by another individual/
organization in which participation from the IBA has been solicited. Examples of such events/
activities include conferences, competitions, seminars, meetings, as well as social delegations, 
sports activities, excursions, etc.
16
 17
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Regulatory
	 Bodies	and	Offices
Office of Student Affairs (OSA)
All disciplinary matters of students within the vicinity of the IBA Karachi shall fall under the 
domain of the Office of Student Affairs (OSA) headed by the Dean Student Affairs (DSA). 
Disciplinary matters of IBA students at the Karachi University and IBA Hostels will be handled 
by the IBA Registrar Office. All misconduct and violations will be reported to the Reporting 
Desk, and the DSA will be the final authority in recommending penalties. These may be a 
range from warnings to community service, counselling to monetary penalties, or strict 
disciplinary action through the Disciplinary Committee (DC), that is a separate, independent 
body that comes under the Student Conduct and IBA Standards Committee (SCISC). In case 
of serious and major offences, the DSA may choose to forward the case to the DC. The violator 
will then be contacted by the Secretary DC for recording a statement and initiating the 
investigation.
Reporting Desk Guidelines
Both the Main and City campuses have Campus Facilitators, who report to the Dean Student 
Affairs. All disciplinary and misconduct cases can be reported by faculty, staff, or students to 
the Campus Facilitators, who report them to the Reporting Desk. Alternatively, faculty, staff, 
or students can report cases directly to the Reporting Desk via email, by calling on the 
helpline, or via the WhatsApp number. The Reporting Desk records, investigates, and verifies 
all violations and sends them to the Registrar Office for further processing.
All misconduct and violations will be reported to the Reporting Desk, under the OSA.
l Campus Facilitators are present in every building in both campuses and report all violations 
to the Reporting Desk.
l Campus Facilitators are the first identifier of the violators, and the Reporting Desk official 
may intervene in case of any argument.
l Campus Facilitators, Reporting Desk Officials, Staff members, and Faculty members can ask 
the violator for his/her Student ID or ERP and can report it to the Reporting Desk. In case a 
student is not cooperating, the Reporting Desk official will handle the situation.
l Students can also report the violation of the Code of Conduct by simply sending an email to 
the Reporting Desk mentioning all the information they know; the Reporting Desk Official 
will inquire and report it.
l Campus Facilitators, Staff members, and Faculty members would need to show their ID 
card to students when they ask for violators’ ID card or ERP.
l Penalties for minor offences such as imposition of first-or-second time offence will be 
recommended by the DSA to the Registrar Office.
l Major offences such as Fourth Violation or any other major violation will be sent to the DC. 
l The DC’s decision of the penalty for the disciplinary violations will be decided by the 
committee.
Email: reportingdesk@iba.edu.pk 
Helpline: 1911 (8:30 a.m. – 5:30 p.m.)
WhatsApp: 0302-5550911 (available 24/7)
Relevant Committees
There are two committees relevant to student conduct and disciplinary matters.
1. Student Conduct and IBA Standards Committee (SCISC)
The Student Conduct and IBA Standards Committee (SCISC) is a faculty committee that 
reviews the Code of Conduct under direct supervision of the Executive Director (ED).
The custodian of the student Code of Conduct is the SCISC. The committee deals with 
recommendations and formulations of policy in consultation with the ED and other IBA 
stakeholders on student conduct.
The committee is comprised of 12 faculty members, with at least one faculty member having 
administrative position who is designated by the ED of the IBA to serve on it. Each of the three 
schools of IBA must have representation in the committee.
The Chairperson of the Committee i s appointed by the ED from among the committee members.
The quorum of SCISC is 2/3rd of the committee members.  
The Secretary for the SCISC and DC will remain the same.
The tenure  for both committees is of three (3) years. After three years a new SCISC will be 
constituted, replacing at least 30 percent of the previous committees’ members.18
 19
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-242. Disciplinary Committee (DC)
The Disciplinary Committee (DC) is a sub-committee of the Student Conduct and IBA 
Standards Committee (SCISC). The DC is comprised of the SCISC members. The DC 
membership exists for the period of one semester. The membership of DC is rotational 
between members of SCISC. By the end of the semester, one member of DC will be replaced 
by another member of the SCISC. Currently, the Disciplinary Committee comprises of three 
Sub Committees:
l Sub Committee 01 – Deals with Financial Crimes, PDA, and other misconduct cases
l Sub Committee 02 - Anti-Drug and Tobacco Committee (ADTC)
l Sub Committee 03 – Deals with all cheating incidents in quizzes and examinations
The functions of the DC shall be as under: 
l To investigate the violations of the IBA Code of Conduct by the students and examine any 
disciplinary matter referred to by the DSA.
l To decide the penalties against the misconduct. The committee will follow the guidelines 
for punishment provided by the violation grid.
l The Chair of the SCISC may request the Chair of DC to provide a summary of the nature of 
cases they have dealt with in a specific time.
l One member from the DC may be assigned the responsibility of providing the 
implementation report of the penalties imposed. Such a report will not disclose the nature 
of the penalty. However, this will only indicate the efficiency of the concerned departments 
in policy implementation.
 Reporting Misconduct
	 Office	of	Student	Affairs
Initiation of Disciplinary Proceedings:
Lodging complaint:
l A complaint can be made of an alleged misconduct to the Reporting Desk or via IBA 
Complaint Portal.
l All the minor misconducts will be handled by the DSA - only major and repeated minor 
misconducts will be reported to the DC.
l The discretion of forwarding the case to the DC will lie with the DSA solely.
Review of complaint
l The DSA will review each complaint to determine the course of action and will choose one 
of the following:
	s  Dismiss the complaint or resolve the issue through counselling.
	s  Impose a penalty for minor misconduct.
 s Initiate disciplinary proceedings for major misconduct by forwarding the complaint to 
the DC.
Summons & written statement
l The secretary of SCISC will notify the accused, through the committee secretary, of a specific 
day and time when the accused will have to appear before the committee.
l During the first hearing, the committee will inform the accused verbally of the reason for 
being summoned.
l Before the formal hearing, the accused will be required to submit a written statement to 
give his/her version.
20
 21
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Case handling process
l The Secretary DC will send an email to the accused student to report to his or her office. In 
case of no response to the email, the secretary will make a follow-up call.
l The accused student will report, and the Secretary DC will inform the accused student the 
reason for being summoned.
l The accused student will submit a written statement to the Secretary DC in which the 
accused will clarify his or her position.
l The Secretary DC will schedule a meeting for the formal hearing of the accused student 
with the Committee.
l The Secretary DC will secure all the evidence related to the case and present all the 
evidence to the DC on the day of the accused student’s formal hearing.
l The committee will review documentary and circumstantial evidence. CCTV footage will 
only be reviewed in the security monitoring room. No footage will ever be produced or 
shared through a portable device.
l If the accused fails to attend the meeting, the committee may decide without any input 
from the accused.
l Penalties will be deliberated upon, and a decision will be reached with individual voting.
l The Chair of the DC will decide the penalty for the student (violator).
l The Chair of DC will share the final decision with DSA, and relevant departments for the 
implementation of the decision. 
l A copy of the decision letter along with minutes of the meeting, and statement of the 
student, and any other documents relevant to the case will be made a part of the 
committee file, for record keeping. Documents related to the cases will also be made a part 
of the student’s personal file.
Failure to appear
In case a student fails to appear for the hearing and is unable to present a valid, verifiable 
justification, the committee can finalize its recommendation after reviewing the case in 
absentia.
Confidentiality
All the proceedings of the DC are to remain confidential. Members of the DC shall abide by and 
comply with the terms and conditions of the Committee’s Non-Disclosure Agreement, as 
amended from time to time.
Meetings
The DC shall meet as and when necessary to consider reports and investigate matters relating 
to discipline of students and shall be the final authority to determine whether a violation of 
Code of Conduct/act of indiscipline has been proved or not. The committee is to, however, meet 
at least once before the commencement of every semester and on completion of the semester. 
The conduct of the meetings will be guided by the following rules:
l At least three of the DC members, including the Chairperson, shall form a quorum for the 
transaction of business by the Committee. 
l The DC Chair shall preside at all meetings of the DC and, in consultation with the other 
committee members, shall set the agenda of items to be addressed at each meeting.l The DC Chair will ensure that the following documents are circulated at least three (3) days 
in advance of each meeting:
	s  The agenda for the meeting.
 s Any other documentation related to the business to be conducted by the Committee.
Decisions
l The DC deliberates and arrives at a decision by individual vote. To determine that a student 
has violated the IBA rule, a majority of the voting DC members present must conclude that 
the evidence presented constitutes a clear and persuasive case in support of the charges 
against the student.
l If the student is found to have misled the DC during the hearing, it may result in another 
investigation and case against the accused student.
l In matters that have significant precedence value, the DC Chairperson may seek more 
evidence before the decision is made.
l Decisions of the Committee shall be communicated in writing and via email to the accused 
through the DSA.
Enforcement
The enforcement of discipline in IBA shall be supervised and controlled through the following 
persons: 
l Deans and Department Chairpersons for all classroom/academic activities.
l Controller of Examinations for all examinations related matters. 
l Respective Hostel Superintendent in Hostels. 
l In public places and on occasions of public gathering within and outside the IBA Campus, 
through the DSA/Activity Coordinator.
l In all other inter-IBA relations of students, through a combination of officers mentioned 
under sub-clause a, b, and c. 
l The DSA will be the promulgating authority for all penalties relating to the Code of Conduct 
and maintenance of discipline in the student community.
Overall procedural steps
Procedural steps followed by the DC for the enforcement of the Code of Conduct:
1
Case reported 
to the 
Disciplinary 
Committee 
(DC).2
Secretary of the 
DC will notify 
student 
(violator), 
through the DC 
Secretary, to 
appear before 
the DC and 
inform the 
reason for being 
summoned and 
submission of 
the written 
statement.  3
The DC hears 
the case; 
evaluates 
evidences, 
decides the 
final decision.  
 4
The final 
decision is 
communicated 
to the 
student(s), and 
relevant 
departments.5
DSA and 
relevant 
department 
implement the 
decision.22
 23
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Appeal
 Procedure
Students disputing the Disciplinary Committee decision may file a written appeal with the 
Student Conduct and IBA Standards Committee (SCISC) through the Secretary SCISC, no 
later than 15 academic working days following notification of the DC’s decision. 
Appellate body
The Chairman SCISC will be Chair for the appellate body. The composition of the Committee 
should be members of SCISC excluding members of the DC.
Procedure
When the decision of the Appellate Committee is in the process to be taken, the decision of the 
DC should stand. Any other situations such as suspension and exam cases will be dealt by the 
Appellate Body to decide on a case-to-case basis.
l Step 1
 The appeal must state one of the following as grounds for the appeal:
	s Procedural irregularities by the DC sufficient to affect the determination of the original 
hearing authority. The standard of review required is that:
	s  Only a substantive deviation from the DC stated procedures which results in an 
unfair outcome provides a sufficient basis for an appeal.
 s The existence of harmless procedural irregularities which did not affect the decision 
made by the DC does not provide a basis for appeal.
l Insufficient evidence to support the decision of the DC. The standard of review required is 
that the original hearing authority’s decision was clearly erroneous and cannot reasonably 
be supported by the evidence; necessitating ‘deference’ to be given to the original decision.
l Harshness of the penalty imposed by the DC sufficient to show an abuse of discretion. The 
standard of review required is failure to exercise reasonable judgment under the 
circumstances, necessitating deference to be given to the original decision.
l Emergence of new evidence that was not reasonably available for presentation to the DC 
which may reasonably be expected to affect the recommendation reached by the DC.  The 
standard of review required is:
	s  Appellant to demonstrate that evidence was not reasonably available at the time, and;
	s  That the new evidence can be reasonably expected to affect the original body’s decision; 
necessitating the case be remanded to the DC for recording new evidence and 
reconsideration of the decision.
l Step 2
 The Chairman DC will be provided a copy of the student’s written appeal and be asked by 
the appellate body to provide the record/case file.
l Step 3
 The concerned parties shall be informed by the Secretary SCISC about the date, time, and 
place of hearing of the Appeal and forward necessary materials to Appellate Committee 
members and the Appellant. The Appellant and any other party to the original grievance 
will participate and will be given a reasonable time to present relevant information. 
Attorneys are not allowed to attend the meeting on behalf of any parties involved.
l Step 4
 The appeal hearing is to be conducted on the information already available on record. No 
new evidence is to be brought during the appeal hearing. If there appears to be any need 
for new evidence to be submitted, the case may be remanded to the DC.
24
 25
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Academic
 Conduct Guidelines
The academic conduct guidelines are listed as follows:
Instructional Spaces
Classrooms/seminar rooms/auditorium and laboratories are set up to provide a modern and 
conducive learning environment. All lecture rooms are air-conditioned and equipped with 
comfortable chairs and tables, multimedia, projectors, and white boards.
Attendance 
A distinguishing feature of the IBA Karachi is its stringent adherence to the academic 
calendar. Students are required to attend lectures, laboratory sessions, seminars and 
fieldwork specified for every course offered in a semester.
The course instructor takes attendance in each class. Late comers are marked absent even if 
late by one minute; no excuse is accepted. If a student accumulates more than the 
permissible absences, then they must withdraw from that particular course. Students found 
tampering with attendance records in any way will immediately be expelled from the 
Institute. The permissible number of absences for students will include participation of the 
IBA students in conferences/seminars/events, sports at national and/or international level, an 
exchange program, religious activities (pilgrimage etc.) and add-drop week.
Semester type Duration of session Total sessions Allowed absences
Spring or fall 75 or 90 minutes 285 for full-time students 
7 for part-time 
students
Spring or fall 150 or 180 minutes 142 for full-time students 
3 for part-time 
students
Spring, summer, fall 180 minutes 12 MBA-Executive only 3
Summer 120 minutes 21 3
Winter 180 minutes 12 2Please note that no attendance will be transferred from one course to the other. Transfer of 
attendance will only be allowed across sections of the same course for the first week of the 
semester. Attendance of classes on the first and last day of the semester is mandatory for all 
students.
Permissible absences per semester are mentioned in the following table:
Lecture timings
l Full-time students: Lectures are held from Monday to Saturday; morning lectures 
commence at 8:30 a.m. Lectures have the duration of 75 minutes. The subject and course 
requirements will determine the number of classes in a week. The class timetable is emailed 
to the students, and it is the responsibility of the students to stay updated with 
announcements like this on email.
l MBA Executive and part-time students: Lectures for MBA Executive and part-time 
students are held on weekends between 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays and 9:00 a.m. 
to 5:00 p.m. on Sundays, with a 15-minute break in between the lectures.
Class Representatives
Each class may elect one class representative who will act as a liaison between the student 
and the IBA management in all matters.
Withdrawal from a course
A student may withdraw from courses if such withdrawal helps the student in improving 
their performance in the remaining courses. Both full-time and part-time students may 
withdraw from one or more courses during a semester.
For more details, please visit the section on IBA’s official website explaining the process:
https://examination.iba.edu.pk/WithdrawalCourse.php
Semester Freeze
Semester freeze (or break) is a semester in which a student is not registered for any course due to 
personal reasons. Any student availing one or more semester freeze must complete the degree 
requirements before the stipulated time bar for the program in which they are enrolled. 
For more details, please visit the section on IBA’s official website explaining the process: 
https://examination.iba.edu.pk/SemesterFreeze.php26
 27
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Examination
At the IBA Karachi, students will have to appear for midterm and final examinations in each 
semester. Violation of any rules mentioned below may lead to cancellation of the paper and 
any other penalty deemed appropriate by the Disciplinary Committee.
Before Examination
l To maintain the integrity of the examination process, candidates are required to carry a valid 
IBA ID card and show it upon request.
l To avoid disruption and any undue anxiety, candidates are requested to arrive at least 10 
minutes before the commencement of the examination. Candidates will not be allowed to 
enter the examination room/hall 30 and 45 minutes after the start of the midterm or final 
exam, respectively.
l No extra time shall be given to late comers. 
l Under extraordinary circumstances a candidate may be allowed to enter the exam hall 
provided that no other candidate has left the exam hall after handing of their exam material.
l Candidates are responsible for bringing their own (nonprogrammable) calculator, if 
approved by the faculty, for quantitative courses.
l Candidates must bring their own writing material (stationery items) or authorized material 
(notes/books/cheat-sheet) in the examination room as permitted by the subject teacher.
l Cell phones, smart watches and other electronic gadgets are prohibited inside the 
examination room. 
l If a candidate is found using or operating a cell phone, his/her paper will be cancelled and 
the case shall be sent to the Disciplinary Committee.
l Personal belongings such as bags/books/files are to be kept outside the exam hall. Laptops 
may be kept inside the exam hall at owner’s risk with the permission of the invigilator.
l Students are required to occupy the assigned seat number. The proctor may relocate a 
candidate.
During Examination
l Maintain complete silence in the examination hall. A candidate may raise his/her hand to 
draw the attention of the proctor. Clarifications about exam questions may be sought from 
the subject teacher during the first 15 minutes of the exam. 
l Any kind of communication between the candidates is a violation of examination rules and 
will be treated as an offence under the ‘use of unfair means’.
l Lending/borrowing of stationery or calculator is strictly prohibited in the examination hall. 
l Candidates must complete required particulars on answer books/extra sheets and write 
down their ERP number and full name on the question paper at the start of the 
examination, as well as sign against their name and write the answer script number on the 
attendance sheet during the examinations.
l All answers must be written in non-erasable ink with the exception of drawings and 
sketches. 
l If any candidate is found to be writing anything on the question paper or desk or on loose 
paper, he/she shall be considered to be using unfair means, unless the exam paper is also 
the answer booklet and should have the name of the candidate on it.
l In case of open book/open notes exams, candidates must follow instructions given in the 
exam paper by the subject teacher/resource person. Exchange of books and notes during 
such examinations is strictly prohibited.
l Candidates are allowed to leave the examination hall 45 and 60 minutes after 
commencement of midterm or final examination respectively. Re-entry after handing over 
the exam material to the proctor is not allowed.
l If any candidate is found to be in possession of any cheating material or observed to be 
using unfair means, then his/her exam paper shall be cancelled, and the case would be sent 
to the Disciplinary Committee.
28
 29
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24At the end of the examination
l Once the exam time has ended, the proctor will announce ‘all pens down’ after which no 
student should be holding a pen in their hands.
l All answer scripts and question paper should be submitted to the proctor before leaving the 
exam hall.
l In case of an electronic exam, all answers must be properly saved in relevant file formats and 
uploaded to LMS if required or saved on desktop for retrieval. 
Plagiarism/cheating
Plagiarism and cheating are prohibited at the IBA. There should be absolutely no plagiarism/
cheating in any examination, quiz, assignment, report and/or presentation by any student. 
Some examples of plagiarism are as follows:
The appropriation and paraphrasing of an idea, argument, information, maps, charts, tables, 
images, song lyrics, data sets, computer course codes, mathematical formulations, movies, or 
new-media compositions from a published source, without adequate citation.
Direct quotation from the published sources that are not fully and explicitly cited and 
acknowledged. 
However, each case will be decided on its own merit.
Evaluation
During a student’s time at the IBA, they will be asked to fill the faculty and course evaluation 
questionnaires in order to assist the Institute in its course monitoring and evaluation. The 
faculty and course evaluations are conducted once in a semester, before the final term exams 
to gather information/feedback anonymously. Students may access the faculty and course 
evaluation system online through the IBA portal. Non-compliance may result in financial fines 
or penalties.
For more details, please visit the section on IBA’s official website explaining the process: 
Guidelines & FAQs: https://qec.iba.edu.pk/pdf/guidelines-faq-faculty-course-evaluation.pdf 
Video: https://qec.iba.edu.pk/video-tutorial-on-student-evaluation-of-faculty-and-course.php 
Recommendation Letters
The IBA provides its students the facility to get a recommendation letter from its faculty for 
upcoming opportunities. However, it should be noted that all students should give the 
relevant stakeholders a week’s time to process the recommendation letter.
Verification and Attestation
Please send all verification requests to verification@iba.edu.pk with the subject containing 
full name and student ID (if available) and the following attachments:
l Application reference ID of the institution where admission is being sought
l Destination email address
l Valid contact number
The verification processing time is 3 to 7 business days on average and may increase during 
times of high volume.
There are no charges for such verification or attestation. General Conduct
 Guidelines
Dress code
All students are to be decently dressed and in a manner that is appropriate for any institution 
of higher learning. Clothes should be suitable to, and represent the high cultural, social, and 
professional values for which IBA is known. Students are expected to be neatly dressed.
Clothes should be inoffensive in terms of their cuts and style, and/or the messages printed on 
them. Dress that is revealing as compared to societal standards is not allowed. Shorts, 
sleeveless, tight-fitting clothing, and see-through materials are strictly forbidden. Students are 
not allowed to wear casual slippers (flip flops).
Indecent conduct
Indecent conduct is behaviour, action, speech, or distribution of material that is deemed 
obscene, indecent, or lewd or in violation of social and cultural norms.
Sexual misconduct
Engaging in explicit and overt/covert sexual activity.
Public display of affection (PDA)
In order to maintain a professional atmosphere of learning and mutual respect at IBA, students 
should refrain from public display of affection (PDA), that is, inappropriate display of expression
30
 31
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24or intimate physical contact or activity. Physical contact between two individuals that could 
make others in the vicinity uncomfortable or serve as a distraction should be strictly avoided. 
Students are required to observe behaviour, which is socially and culturally appropriate and 
acceptable, both on- and off-site, which includes on campus, all on- and off-site events and 
activities, hostels, and on the IBA buses/shuttles. Students are expected to conduct themselves 
respectfully at all times, which is reflective of the high moral, academic, and professional values 
and standards of the IBA.
Events and activities
Any event or activity organized by students, both on- or -offsite, that is against cultural and 
societal norms, is against state law, and is not in line with IBA’s high moral, ethical, and 
professional values and standards is strictly not permitted. There is a zero-tolerance policy, and 
any such violation will be dealt with severe penalties and strict disciplinary action, which may 
include expulsion from the IBA.
Disorderly conduct
Disorderly conduct refers to breaching of peace, or aiding, abetting, or luring another person to 
breach the peace on IBA premises or at IBA sponsored function/activities.
Any unauthorized use of electronics or other devices to make an audio or video recording of 
any person in his or her personal office space or classrooms without prior knowledge/
permission is strictly prohibited.
Recording of any activity in a public space at IBA is allowed, and the footage can be used for 
disciplinary action against said individuals. Moreover, the entire campus is covered by CCTV to 
ensure compliance. 
Substance abuse
Possession, use, purchase, and/or distribution of alcohol or intoxicating drugs (such as but not 
limited to heroin, opiates, cocaine, marijuana, hashish, alcoholic beverages, or other intoxicating 
substances) at the IBA is strictly prohibited. The use or possession of any kind of narcotics and/
or alcohol will result in disciplinary action and the possibility of immediate cancellation of 
admission and expulsion from the hostels. Student suspected of consuming alcohol may be 
asked to take a breathalyzer/lab test. Student suspected of consuming drugs may be asked to 
take a tetrahydrocannabinol test on the spot or in a laboratory.
Smoking/Vaping/Sheesha
Smoking, Vaping, Sheesha and any other electronic smoking device is prohibited inside IBA’s 
premises, and on- and off-site, including shuttles/IBA buses, hostels, and in IBA events and 
activities, barring designated spaces. To benefit the health and safety of the IBA community, it 
is IBA’s endeavour to convert the Institute’s premises into a ‘No Smoking Area’. It is the 
responsibility of smokers to be considerate to and mindful of non-smokers and of the campus 
safety. Cigarette waste should be disposed properly in a safe manner in designated outdoor 
ashtrays. Fire hazard, campus safety and cleanliness should be considered in disposing of 
cigarettes and ash.
Students are also informed not to smoke or vape in the vicinity of the University of Karachi. Any 
infraction will result in serious disciplinary action.
Possession and/or its use will result in confiscation of the vape or sheesha, and disciplinary 
action will be taken, including the possibility of cancellation of residential space.
Prior permissions
Prior permission in writing through Dean Students Affairs is required for the following:
l Organizing co-curricular/extracurricular activities on campuses.
l Making public statements, or any communication with media on behalf of the Institute or 
making a public/ media comment on the internal affairs of the Institute.
l Inviting government representative and/or foreign dignitaries to any of the campuses.
l Inviting guests into IBA premises 
l Peaceful demonstrations/congregations
l These demonstrations can only be held during an allotted time in the designated space. 
Demonstrations cannot disrupt the academic activities of the Institute.
Student visitor policy
Students’ guests are allowed to visit the IBA campuses from Monday to Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 
6:00 p.m. All visitors will have to abide by the following rules and guidelines:
l Students should fill out the Student Visitor Form at least 24 working hours prior to the 
planned visit. (Link to the form: https://forms.gle/u9TRDsXfpuZcqk9T8)
l The form is automatically approved, and you can bring in your guests after 24 hours of filling 
in the form.
l Please make sure that your guests bring their original CNIC/Passport with them. Without 
their original documents, they will not be allowed to enter the campus.
l All visitors must sign-in and sign-out upon entering and leaving the IBA premises.
l Visitors are only allowed to visit the campus when accompanied by a student, who will give 
them a tour of the campus.
l All visitors must leave the IBA premises by 6:00 p.m.
l Students are strictly not allowed to bring their guests for events that are specifically held for 
IBA students. Any violation of the visitor policy will be considered as a violation of the Code 
of Conduct, and disciplinary action may be taken against the student.32
 33
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Visitor misconduct
IBA students, faculty, and staff are responsible for the behaviour of their guests when within 
the IBA premises. They need to ensure that their guests do not violate the security rules, 
regulations, and behavioural norms of the Institute. Any unpleasant or undesirable incident 
occurring because of the behaviour of the guest can lead to disciplinary action against the IBA 
student, faculty, or staff who invited them.
Loitering in Karachi University
Loitering inside the Karachi University premises is strictly not allowed. Exceptions to this rule 
are general walking/jogging between hostel/campus and/or buying of grocery/food items (take 
away only). Any violation will result in strict disciplinary action. 
Student identification
IBA students are required to carry their student identification cards at all times. It is incumbent 
on IBA students to show their identification cards to IBA staff/officials when requested.  
Members of IBA security team, administrative staff, and faculty members have been 
empowered with the authority to confiscate student identification card in case they see any 
violation of the Code of Conduct for investigative purposes. Failure to do so may lead to fine or 
any other disciplinary action.
Misuse of identification
Misuse of identification is a violation of the Code of Conduct and includes giving access or 
lending your IBA student card to someone else.
Forging someone else’s signature and ERP number to mislead authorities.
False representation
Forgery, alteration, unauthorized possession, or use of IBA’s documents, records, or instruments 
of identification, forged or fraudulent communications (paper or electronic mail) can lead to 
disciplinary actions against the student.
Unauthorized entry or access
Unauthorized entry into or presence within IBA’s premises,  including athletic facilities, 
construction sites, and student rooms or offices, even when unlocked, is prohibited. Tampering 
with locks on buildings, unauthorized possessions, or use of keys including their alteration or 
duplication is against IBA’s policy. Climbing on IBA buildings, IBA-owned structures, or 
participation in any of these activities may subject the student to fines and other sanctions.
Ragging and bullying
Ragging and bullying are expressions of aggression via verbal, electronic, written, or physical 
communication, psychological and/or emotional behaviours towards an individual and/or 
group, by an individual and/or group. Such behaviours put individuals at a risk of harm and 
cause emotional distress. Ragging and bullying are prohibited at the IBA and any student 
subjected to such behaviour or a witness to it, should report it to the OSA/superintendent/
building manager/administrator/hostel wardens immediately.
Ragging and bullying constitute:
l Words spoken or written which have the effect of teasing or treating/handling with 
rudeness of another.   
l Rowdy or undisciplined activities by any student(s) which can cause annoyance, hardship, 
physical or psychological harm.
l Coercing another to indulge in an act he/she normally wouldn’t do. l Any act that prevents, disrupts, or disturbs the regular academic activity of any other 
student.   
l Exploiting the services of any student for completing academic tasks assigned to an 
individual or group of students.   
l Any act of financial extortion or forceful expenditure put on a student by other students.
l Any attempt to take advantage of a freshman, or an attempt to ridicule a freshman in front 
of others.
Harassment
Harassment means written, verbal or physical conduct that, due to its inappropriateness, 
severity, persistence, and pervasiveness, adversely affects the victim’s morale and ability to 
function. This may include conduct based on an individual’s actual or perceived race, colour, 
national origin, religion, gender, disability, or any other distinguishing characteristics.
Harassment constitutes:
l Harassment may qualify as sexual harassment if it involves a sexual connotation through 
words, actions or behaviours or any acts that are inappropriate or non-consensual in nature 
and include but are not limited to photographs or other written/electronic communications 
that is non-consensual in nature. Sexual harassment also includes any inappropriate actions 
or behaviours by those in a position of power or authority towards those on whom authority 
extends.
l Menacing behaviour or threats of harm to self, to others or to persons related to them, often 
as a means of coercing the target to acquiesce in the perpetrator’s demands, qualifies as 
power harassment.
To file any complaint, please contact the Office of Student Affairs.
False allegations
l Deliberately accusing a person or an organization of misconduct with knowledge that this 
allegation is false is a violation of the Code of Conduct.
Financial misconduct
Some examples of financial misconduct include:
l Providing false financial information for the purpose of obtaining any concession or financial aid.
l Signing a document with someone else’s name, initials, or signature. 
l Financial misappropriation.
l Misrepresentation, or false statement of fact(s).
Theft and vandalism
Theft and negligence, or intentional damage to personal or the Institute’s property is 
prohibited, as is possession of the stolen property. Repair and replacement costs will be 
charged to the appropriate student(s) and may warrant disciplinary action.
Retaliation
Retaliation can take many forms, including continued abuse, violence, threats, and 
intimidation. Any form of retaliation is not tolerated at IBA and may result in severe disciplinary 
action. Independent of any sanction, an interim measure may be imposed in response to the 
underlying allegation of this misconduct.34
 35
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Weapons and fireworks
No student can possess or use firearms on IBA’s property and its environs. Firearms, including 
rifles, shotguns, handguns, air guns, gas operated guns and all other ammunition or hand-
loading equipment and supplies for the same, are not allowed. No student may possess or use 
fireworks, dangerous devices, chemicals, or explosives on IBA’s property or its environs. Items 
such as knives, which could be viewed as weapons, are also forbidden. The IBA Karachi has a 
zero-tolerance policy in this regard.
Fire safety
No such actions are allowed by the students which can cause fire within the premises of the 
Institution. Fire drills are held on a regular basis. Directions for fire drill procedures are posted in 
every building. Students are financially responsible for damages resulting from reckless 
conduct or violation of this policy. Any student in violation of IBA’s fire safety rules {e.g., 
unauthorized candle, fairy lights (electric and/or battery operated)/any object burning, 
tampering with fire safety equipment, etc.} will be subject to restitution and replacement costs, 
a fine, adjudication through the student conduct process or other reasonable resolution as 
deemed appropriate by the Dean Student Affairs (DSA) or his/her designate.
Lost and found procedure:
l All the lost and found items must be handed over to the Security Department immediately. 
These items are to be deposited at Gate 4 for safe custody; at the City Campus, they must be 
deposited at the CCTV room. 
l Non-valuable items like stationery etc. will be logged and stored in the housekeeping 
department. 
l All valuable items will be logged in security rooms at both campuses by adding an entry in 
the lost and found register. They will be stored in safe lockers.
l All the lost items found will be given a number, description, location for where it was found 
and the person who found it. The housekeeping, security guard, or CCTV operator should 
sign in the register after receiving the lost items.
l At the time of delivering the items to the student or faculty/staff, the lost and found register 
must be signed by both parties.
l If in case the item needs to be sent by courier, it will be done by the Security department. 
Confirmation for the address has to be taken through fax/email. All efforts should be made 
to trace the owner.
l No one is allowed to take home lost and found items. At the time of handing over lost and 
found items, the CCTV camera must be in operation for recording purposes.
RFID procedure:
The procedure of the Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) at IBA Karachi is as following:
l Students are supposed to test their RFIDs by scanning the cards at both the RFID scanners at 
Gate 4.
l Turnstile scanner is for the students entering IBA by walk and RFID door scanner is for students 
entering IBA using their vehicles.
l After testing the card either the barrier will open (status of the card: active) or the machine will 
give a beep/no response (status of the card: inactive).
l Once the status is identified as inactive, the said student/faculty may submit the card at the 
Gate 4 security office. The security supervisor present in the office will ask the student to fill a 
RFID form.
l After the submission of the RFID form, the security department of IBA will provide a temporary 
gate pass having validity of one month to the student.
l After receiving the inactive card, the Security department runs the card through the software 
for activation. In case the card isn’t activated, or any error is generated the card is sent to the 
company for encryption.l The company returns the activated card, or it is hereby confirmed that the card is damaged.
l The security department will generate a data having the list of new, lost and damaged cards. 
This list is then sent to the Program Office for further compliance.
l The cards of students/faculty, which are activated through the software or activated by the 
company, will be informed through a message (sent by IT) or an email. While the student is 
receiving the card, a copy of the receiving slip should be signed by them as proof. Once the 
cards are activated, students will be informed by an automated message and given their card.
Protecting student identity
While students should be honest about themselves, they should not provide personal 
information to anyone that could be used against them, for example sharing their home 
address, telephone number, work telephone or email address.
Political endorsements
When posting on behalf of a student organization, students should not endorse or support any 
political candidate.
Personal and institutional security
‘Security’ has become a subject of immense importance and concern at both the personal and 
institutional level. Various measures have been taken to improve the quality of surveillance. In 
order to ensure security, a proactive and vigilant approach needs to be adopted by all 
individuals of the IBA community.
General safety tips
l Before embarking on any journey, ascertain the prevailing security situation from local TV 
news channels.
l Report any suspicious activity and remain vigilant at all times.
l Immediately inform the security staff and report any security breach/suspicious activity.
l Avoid crowded and congested places when security alerts have been issued through the 
media.
l Use tracker devices for car and self, if possible.
l Maintain regular situational awareness of crowded places.
Campus guidelines (Do’s and Don’ts)
l All students are required to always carry their official IBA ID card and the National Identity 
Card at all times. 
l It is mandatory for all IBA students to wear/display their IBA identity card.
l Students are advised to display their IBA ID card and take care of their personal belongings 
at all times. 
l Lost ID cards can be replaced with Rs. 1,000 at the Department Program Office situated at 
the Fauji Foundation Building, Main Campus, IBA Karachi.
l Any student found lending their ID card to an outsider to get past security will be penalized 
with a fine of Rs. 5,000 and also subject to disciplinary action. Any student found tampering, 
changing photograph of identity card and/or preparing a forged identity card will be 
penalized with a fine of Rs 5,000 and also subject to disciplinary action. This is a violation of 
the IBA’s policy. 
l IBA security staff on duty is authorized to ask any person entering IBA to prove/show their 
identity and wear the IBA identity card. 
l The safety and security of personal belongings of students, including vehicles, is their own 
responsibility. IBA will not be responsible for any loss because of carelessness/irresponsible 
behaviour. 36
 37
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24l All lost items are to be immediately reported to the campus security office/hostel warden so 
that necessary action can be initiated to facilitate recovery/identification of culprits. The lost 
items can be submitted to the security office situated at Gate 4 at the Main Campus and the 
Security Office at the City Campus. 
l Comply with the instructions for vehicle security, obtain a valid vehicle pass and display 
sticker for entry into the IBA premises. 
l Allow time for inspection of vehicles at IBA entry points. Unchecked/unauthorized entry of 
vehicles is a grave danger to security.
l Before leaving, lock your car. Bike riders should lock their bike and helmet with a wire lock.  
Park at your own risk.
l Carefully plan and execute security arrangements for events such as concerts. Avoid late 
night events.
l Filter terrorizing messages and confirm their validity before informing others.
l Don’t leave your personal belongings, such as bags, laptops, cell phones, etc., unattended, 
even at the charging booths.
l Security staff must be informed well in advance of the arrival of guests/visitors, including 
providing vehicle registration numbers in cases where vehicles are required to enter IBA 
premises.
l Never bring any weapons including firearms, daggers/drugs/alcohol/explosive substance to 
campus/hostels. The Institute holds a zero-tolerance policy towards possession of firearms/
weapons, explosives and flammable materials, drugs, alcohol, etc. in the campus and 
hostels.
l Visualize emergency situations and prepare contingency plans. This must be done at both 
the organizational and personal level.
l Use of barrier passes on a vehicle with a different registration number is not allowed. Please 
obtain a fresh barrier pass when the vehicle is changed. Students found in possession of 
fake/duplicate barrier passes will be penalized according to the IBA policy. Don’t handover 
your vehicle sticker to anyone, including any outsider. Stickers must be displayed on the 
front windscreen. 
l In case of vehicle theft/loss, follow the procedure mentioned below:
 s Contact Citizens-Police Liaison Committee (CPLC) 24/7 call center helplines                      
021-35662222 and 021-35682222 or any other CPLC office for lodging complaint of 
snatched/stolen vehicle.
	 s		 Provide at least basic information of the vehicle i.e., registration number, make, colour 
and place of the incident.
	s  Call police at 15 control to relay the message of snatched/stolen vehicle.
 s The following are the contact details to reach CPLC: 021-35683333, 111-222-345;           
e-mail: info@cplc.org.pk.
l In case of mobile theft/lost follow the procedure mentioned below:
 s Call the police at 15 to report your missing handset and place a recovery request, 
even if you think they will not do anything.
 s Call PTA at their toll-free number 0800-25625 to make your phone inoperative.
 s Call CPLC at 021-5682222 to make your phone inoperative (for Karachi only).
l Use of quadcopter/drone, remotely operated aerial surveillance/photography devices are not 
allowed on campus without permission.
Parking on campus
All members of the Campus community (faculty, staff, students, and visitors) are expected to 
follow IBA’s parking and transportation policies.
These policies are enacted to increase campus safety and to preserve parking for IBA 
employees and students who are issued permits.l A car sticker is mandatory for all students.
 s  Carpooling/ride sharing is good practice. Vehicles with student drivers are allowed to 
enter through Gate 4. Passengers should be dropped off for entry through the side gate 
to enter the campus.
l Within the campuses, vehicles should not be accelerated beyond 15 to 20 km/h.
 s  Vehicles with tinted film, curtains, blinds on front, back windscreen and side windows are 
not allowed to enter the campuses.
 s  Factory fitted tinted glass vehicles may be allowed in by the security if the department is 
satisfied in terms of visibility inside the car.
l To ensure safety, helmets are mandatory to be worn while riding a two-wheeler and students 
driving cars must wear their seat belts.
 s  To provide maximum space for self-driven vehicles, a chauffeur-driven vehicle with a sticker 
may on occasions be asked to park/wait outside the IBA Campus at the Maskan gate.
 s  The person to whom the sticker is issued will undertake to park his/her vehicle in the 
assigned area, namely the area earmarked for faculty, staff, students, or two-wheelers as the 
case may be.
 s  Vehicle owners are to properly secure their vehicles with dual lock systems, etc. It is better to 
have your vehicle insured. In case of loss or theft, IBA will not be responsible. Do not leave 
valuable items in your vehicles.
l Parking areas between Gate 1 to Gate 4, Adamjee and behind Fauji Foundation building are 
reserved for faculty and staff vehicles. Students are prohibited from parking their vehicles in the 
above-mentioned areas.
l Students can park their vehicles starting from the ring road to the parking behind Aman CED.
l The checking procedure from Maskan gate till parking of the vehicle at Alumni Students’ Center 
parking takes 20 minutes approximately. Students are therefore requested to keep that time 
cushion in their mind before leaving for IBA.
l Parking at the City Campus is limited so it is on a first-come, first-served basis. Aman Tower and 
JS Auditorium basement can also be used for car parking.
Car sticker policy
Car stickers are issued only to students, staff and faculty/board members of IBA who maintain cars 
either on their names or against the names of their close relations (i.e. wife, husband, daughter or 
son). Under normal circumstances, not more than one sticker is issuable.
Students will be issued one sticker only – one for their car and one for their bike.
The validity of the car sticker will be for a maximum period of two years.
Possession of IBA sticker does not excuse the holder from being asked by security/gate staff to 
prove his/her identity if required.
IBA students are only allowed to use University of Karachi (Maskan gate) for entry and exit as per 
the University of Karachi policy.
Students or their drivers found roaming around in the University of Karachi without any valid 
reason are liable for disciplinary action as per the policy of the Institute.
Any violation of instructions/incidence of misuse of the privilege of possessing a car sticker may 
lead to cancellation of the sticker.38
 39
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Procedure for obtaining a vehicle sticker
l The procedure for obtaining a vehicle entry sticker is as follows:
 s  Apply online by visiting https://ibaapps.iba.edu.pk/barrierpass/  and upload the required 
documents. 
 s  Sticker will be ready within 2 working days
 s  Please bring 2 x photographs (1x1) for motor bike barrier pass at the time of collection.
l Stickers can be collected from:
 s  Main Campus: Security office located on the ground floor, room no. 7, Fauji Foundation 
Building – UAN: 111-422-422, Ext: 2467
 s  City Campus: Security office located near main entry gate – UAN: 111-422-422, Ext: 1468 and 
1461.
 s  Rs. 100/- will be charged for the fee voucher per sticker.
As per the instructions issued by the University of Karachi officials and limited parking space, 
students will be issued one sticker only.
 Guidelines for
 Social Media Engagement
The following Code of Conduct has been compiled to serve as a guideline for the students in 
their conduct on social media (individually or in a group) that may be related and/or linked to 
IBA Karachi.
1. Students should be honest about their identity. They must participate only under their own 
name and should take extra care in safeguarding their personal information.
2. Students should be respectable and courteous while communicating or posting anything 
on social media.
3. Students are expected to be cognizant of rules and regulations by relevant government 
bodies regarding posting on social media and especially understand as to what can be 
considered as an offence under the law.
4. Students are expected to be cognizant of the fact that misuse of social media may entail 
reputational, legal and ethical implications. Inappropriate content observed by third parties/
prospective employers may impact perception of the student and the Institute and 
undermine future employment prospects of the student and reputation of the Institute.
5. Opinions and debates related to political, social and religious issues must not be expressed 
on behalf of IBA or any organizational unit within IBA (like department, office, club, or 
society, etc.).
40
 41
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-246. IBA will not accept any form of bullying, cyberbullying, or harassment by any student. 
Wherever such an action involves IBA, appropriate action will be taken by the 
administration. In cases where IBA is not involved, it will ensure necessary action as may be 
required under law and cooperate with the relevant competent authority as may be 
designated under law, for the purpose.
7. Making public statements, or any communication with media on behalf of the Institution or 
making a public/media comment on the internal affairs of the Institution is not allowed. 
Additionally, confidential Institution information or details cannot be shared on social media 
or any other media platform. Strict disciplinary action will be taken in such cases.
8. Following are a few examples of such actions that can lead to action by IBA or by 
government bodies. The following list is indicative and not exhaustive but should help 
students understand the nature of offences:
 a. Sending mean, threatening, or harassing messages to another individual or group 
through texts, e-mail, web pages or instant messaging.
 b. Spreading misinformation, lies and rumours about an individual through the internet or 
text messages.
 c. Posting comments/photos, etc. and deliberately mocking an individual with the intent to 
harass or humiliate them or defamatory content targeting IBA or its related institutional 
unit(s).
 d. Posting images that are discriminatory/offensive or links to such content.
 e. Posting images or content to bring disrepute to the Institution or that carry a potential of 
bringing disrepute which includes; misuse of IBA’s intellectual property rights or 
proprietary rights in any manner, breaching confidentiality i.e. revealing confidential 
information owned by IBA and breaching Code of Conduct of IBA.
9. IBA has the right to request the removal of content from an official social media account 
and from a personal account if it is deemed that the account or its submissions/contents 
pose a risk to the reputation of the Institute or to that of its members.
10. In case if any misconduct is reported against any student, Dean Student Affairs (DSA) or 
delegated official by DSA will be authorized to take action and initiate the following steps:
 a. Investigate whether the misconduct is related to or involves IBA in any way.
 b. In the course of such an investigation, DSA or an official delegated by DSA will gather 
evidence from social media him/herself. Evidence submitted by the complainant may not 
be considered as final, and independent evidence will be gathered using the respective 
platform.
 c. Ensure disciplinary action process as per IBA Policy.
 d. May take no further action or may only offer counselling to the involved parties if the 
reported misconduct/complaint requires so, in the discretion of the investigating 
authority.
11. Students are advised to seek guidance from the Marketing and Communications 
Department at IBA for clarity with respect to these guidelines on usage of social media or 
clarity for content intended to be posted on social media or seek permission wherever 
required as per circumstances of the case or in line with relevant IBA Policy.
12. These guidelines may undergo amendments from time to time as may be required at the 
discretion of IBA management.
 Department of Sports and
 Community Engagement (SP@CE)
The Department of Sports and Community Engagement (SP@CE), under the Office of 
Student Affairs, provides a platform to the IBA Community, potential students, and 
external organizations to not only maintain mental, physical, and social well-being but 
also express and hone their talent through sports and cultural activities. The facilities 
offered by the SP@CE include event hall, amphitheatre, society offices, student lounge, 
music room, indoor sports, and outdoor sports facilities. SP@CE has several coaches that 
train students in various sports. Students are encouraged to participate in sports games 
and tournaments, both nationally and internationally.
Some important points to be considered while using the sports facilities:
l Proper sports attire is required for availing sports facilities. Wear clothing appropriate to the 
sport you intend to play.
l Do not bring any valuable items in the sports facilities to avoid misplacing it. If misplaced, 
IBA will not be held responsible.
l Do not bring any edible items and glass bottles on the field and/or gymnasium.
l While on the field and/or gymnasium, do not engage in unnecessary conversation as it 
might distract others.
l Goods and equipment obtained from the Sports Office must be returned after use. Failure 
to comply may result in penalty/denial of services in future.
l Intentional damage and destruction of sports facilities and goods may result in strict 
disciplinary action and/or heavy fine. 
For queries, please contact: teamsports@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 2478 / 2485 / 207042
 43
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Cafeteria
 Services
IBA offers spacious cafeterias on campus, where full meals, snacks and refreshments are 
available.
Timings of cafeteria at Main Campus
Adamjee Cafeteria 8:30 a.m. - 8:00 p.m. (Ext: 2462)
Student Center Cafeteria 8:30 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. (Ext: 2401/2468)
Shade area beside OBS Courtyard 9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.
Library Coffee Shop 8:30 a.m. - 8:00 p.m. (Ext: 2493)
Timings of cafeteria at City Campus
Aman Tower 8:30 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. (Ext: 1013 )
Pepsi Student Lounge 8:30 a.m. - 8:30 p.m. (Ext: 1009)
 Medical and
 Emergency Services
In-house medical center is available at the IBA Main Campus. The IBA Martin Dow Clinic has 
doctors and trained paramedics available. Timings of the medical center are as follows:
Weekdays
Dr. Naushin Fahad
Time: 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Cell: 03012604822
Two paramedical staff 
Timings: 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Clinic reception: 021-38104700-701 Ext: 2062 & 2072
In case of a serious medical emergency, patient should be taken to the nearest hospital. 
Contact numbers of the nearest hospitals are as follows:
IBA Main Campus
Hospital NameDistance from 
CampusAddress and contact 
number
Patel Hospital 4 kmST 18, Block 4, Gulshan-e-
Iqbal, Karachi, 021-111-174-174
DOW University Hospital (OJHA Campus) 7 kmMission Road, Gulzar-e-Hijri, 
Scheme 33, Karachi,
021-38771111
Memon Medical Institute Hospital 8 kmHaider Buksh Gabool Road, 
Safoora Chowrangi, Gulzar-e-
Hijri, Karachi, 021-34691147
IBA City Campus
OMI Hospital 32 meters89/1, Depot lines, MA Jinnah 
Road, Saddar, Karachi, 
021-32258075
SMBB Trauma Center 2 kmCivil Hospital, KMC work 
area, Karachi 021-99215740
Sindh Emergency Rescue Services 1122
IBA Emergency Helpline
In case of an unforeseen event, please contact on the following IBA emergency helpline 
between 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on 021-38103030. In case of an emergency (fire, earthquake 
etc.), the students should follow the evacuation procedure as given below:
 i.  Leave the building from the nearest exit.
 ii. Report to the assembly points and record your attendance.
 iii. Wait for the instructions issued from the management.44
 45
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Library
The IBA Library provides premium user-oriented services. Both campus libraries house diverse 
collections, provide state-of-the-art digital technologies to provide better access to information, 
offer educational programs and serve as primary academic support to the Institute. To 
maintain the sanctity of the library, patrons are expected to abide by the pre-set rules to help 
the library staff in creating an environment that is conducive to learning.
Library conduct and general rules
These rules and policies have been designed to ensure a favorable learning environment and to 
provide equal opportunities for learning. Students are required to comply with the rules below 
to avoid any disciplinary action or penalties:
 a) The library is considered as a quiet place for reading and studying, therefore, students 
are advised to maintain the sanctity of the library by following the library protocols.
 b) Group study and/or discussions are allowed only in the designated collaborative spaces.
 c) Cell phones must be set on silent mode before entering the library and no call should be 
received/placed within the library premises.
 d) Library items must be treated with utmost care. No library item must be marked, 
underlined, mutilated, torn or damaged.
 e) No change to the pre-set order of library furniture and/or other fixtures is permitted.
 f) Use the library coffee shop to consume food and/or beverages. Food item or beverage, 
except water, is prohibited inside the library. 
 g) The reading materials taken from the bookshelves of the library should be left on nearby 
tables/carts, whereas items taken from the library circulation counter should be returned 
to the counter.
 h) Library staff reserves the right to inspect any material being taken in/from the library 
premises.
 i) Library privileges including membership may be denied to the stakeholders/visitors who 
violate/breach library rules and protocols or are otherwise guilty of misconduct.
 j) The library is not responsible for any loss or damage to your personal belongings.
Borrowing rules
All IBA students currently enrolled in various undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate 
programs have the right to access library services, facilities, and resources. Borrowing privileges 
may vary depending on the type of borrower and the nature of the library material being 
borrowed.
Borrowers’ category Number of books Loan period
Undergraduate 4 14 days
Graduate 6 14 days
Postgraduate (PhD) 6 28 days
Postgraduate Diploma 2 14 days
 I. Any library material borrowed may be recalled, if required. Therefore, the loan period 
should not be considered as a legitimate right to retain the material till the due date.
 II. Books tagged as general stacks may be reissued (depending on the borrower’s category 
and subsequent privileges), unless there is no request for hold or recall.
 III. Reference and reserved materials, journals, magazines, and newspapers can only be used 
within the library premises and cannot be borrowed.
 IV. Students who do not return books on time will automatically lose the privilege of 
borrowing any more books from the library until all the borrowed items are returned or 
settled.
 V. Borrowing privileges may also be suspended for the students who have violated library 
rules.
Library fines
Books or materials borrowed from the library must be returned on or before the due date and 
time, otherwise the following charges may apply:
1. PKR. 10/- will be charged per day for each overdue item borrowed from the general stacks.
2. Course reserves (borrowed for 3 hours), accumulate PKR. 50/- per hour as late return 
charges.
3. Reference material borrowed for overnight would be charged PKR. 50/- per hour, maximum 
to PKR. 5,000/- or the replacement cost of the item, whichever is higher.
4. Replacement cost for the lost or damaged materials would be calculated as per the ‘purchase 
cost’ of an item by adding 50% of purchase cost as processing fee. 
5. Another original copy of the lost/damaged book/item may be accepted, provided it carries 
the same ISBN. 50% of the purchase cost would be charged as processing fee.
6. Overdue fine will continue to accumulate on a daily/hourly basis on outstanding items until 
it is renewed, returned, or declared as lost either by the borrower or by the library.
7. Any item being taken out of the library without being borrowed will be classified as ‘item 
theft’, and the violator will be charged PKR. 5,000/- (irreversible) as penalty. 
8. Students found violating or breaching library rules will be charged a disciplinary fine, as per 
the IBA Code of Conduct. The violation cases will also be sent to the ‘Student Conduct and 
IBA Standards Committee’. 46
 47
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Computing and
 ICT Services
The Information and Communication Technology department provides ICT services to the IBA 
Main and City Campuses, hostels, and staff town, serving a total of around 5,000 users on-and-
off campus. The principal aim of the ICT department is to bring state-of-the-art technology to 
the IBA, provide essential services and promote automation.
Lab availability
1. Computer labs at the City Campus are operational from 8:30 a.m. till 9:30 p.m. from Monday 
to Friday, for computing and printing facilities.
2. Students are prohibited from entering labs during a lecture, in order to keep the 
disturbances minimal.
3. Printing facility is accessible on a first-come, first-served basis.
4. Note that only 25 pages per semester can be printed by one student from the lab, other 
than that, should be done from the photocopier.
5. In case of any loss of data, the staff available at the lab, would not be held responsible; to 
avoid losing data students are highly recommended to save their work on a regular basis.
Login account policy
For smooth operations of the computer labs, while protecting the privacy of the information of 
all users, the following rules are in place:
1. No one is allowed to log in using someone else’s user ID and password.
2. To protect your own self from unscrupulous users, make it a habit to log out at the end of 
each session. Please note that you are fully responsible for any actions taken by an 
unauthorized user using your login account.
3. If the terminal is left unattended for more than 15 minutes, you must log out unless there is 
a process running which may take longer to complete. In such a case, the student is to 
inform the lab engineer to ensure that their user account and work is protected.
4. At the time of registration, a user ID and password is assigned to all students to access the 
IBA Wi-Fi.
Workstation usage policy
Students are expected to use all ICT services available to them at IBA, in an ethical and 
responsible manner. Failure to do so will make them liable for an action, in accordance, with 
the provisions of the Prevention of Electronic Crimes Ordinance. Three categories of criminal 
offences cover the following conduct:
l	Unauthorized access to computer material (basic hacking) including illicit copying of software 
held in any computer;
l	Unauthorized access with the intent to commit or facilitate commission of further offences, 
including hacking and tampering of electronic data;
l	Unauthorized modification of computer material, which includes:
l	Intentional and unauthorized destruction of software or data;
l	The circulation of ‘infected’ materials online;
l	An unauthorized addition of a password to a data file or display of any information which 
enables others to gain unauthorized access to the computer.
Internet Usage Policy
Scope and application
This policy applies to all users of the IBA Karachi. It also applies to users connecting personally 
owned devices such as laptop computers, smartphones, and tablets to the Institute’s network, and/
or storing any Institute’s data on such devices. A student can connect up to two concurrent devices 
on the wireless network.
Acceptable internet usage
Students are provided with facilities and equipment to access the internet for legitimate work-
related activity and educational purposes of research and seeking information.
Use of the internet by the IBA students is permitted and encouraged as long as it supports the 
goals and objectives of the organization.
However, the Institute has a policy for the use of internet whereby the users must ensure that they:
1. Comply with the current legislation;
2. Use the internet in an acceptable way;
3. Do not create unnecessary business risk to the company by misusing the internet.
Unacceptable behaviour
In particular, the following is deemed unacceptable use or behavior by the students:
1. Visiting internet sites that contain obscene, hateful, pornographic or otherwise illegal material;
2. Using the internet to send offensive or inappropriate material to other users;
3. Downloading commercial software or any copyrighted materials belonging to third parties, 
unless this download is covered or permitted under a commercial agreement or other such 
license;
4. Hacking into unauthorized areas;
5. Publishing defamatory and/or knowingly false material about the IBA Karachi and your 
colleagues on social networking sites, blogs (online journals), wikis and any online publishing 
format;48
 49
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-246. Revealing confidential information about the IBA Karachi in a personal online posting, upload or 
transmission;
7. Introducing any form of malicious software into the corporate network;
8. Downloading and using any kind of Proxy/VPN tools.
Monitoring
Use of the internet is an extremely valuable business, research and learning tool. However, misuse 
of such a facility can have a detrimental effect on other users and potentially the Institute’s public 
profile. As a result, IBA ICT department monitors:
1. The volume of internet and network traffic;
2. The internet sites visited.
Guidelines for students
1. Use the web browsers for educational purposes of research and information gathering from 
various websites and databases;
2. Keep the allocated personal username and password confidential, and not share it with anyone;
3. Students should not try to access and change any other person’s username, password, files, or 
data;
4. Students can connect up to two concurrent devices on the wireless network;
5. Responsibly access social websites for educational purposes only; always use appropriate 
language in all digital communications through emails, social websites, blogs, or messages;
6. User would not deploy their own wireless routers/access points. In case of any additional 
requirement, the request would be made to the ICT department.
Reach out to the following IT help desk team members for your queries and (or) issues related to 
the PC, laptop, printer, and multimedia:
Main Campus
Mr. Faraz Baig
Email: helpdeskmain@iba.edu.pk and (or) mbaig@iba.edu.pk  
Ext: 2101, 2120, 2114
City Campus 
Mr. Zeeshan Nasir 
Email: helpdeskcity@iba.edu.pk and (or) znasir@iba.edu.pk 
Ext: 1105, 1113
Campus Management System
The IBA Karachi is using the Oracle ERP system to manage the entire students’ academic 
activities at both the campuses. This system manages the overall processes of course offerings, 
course enrolments, class scheduling, attendance, grading, and much more. Students at the IBA 
Karachi get access to the self-service portal and can check their attendance, grades, enrolment, 
and other related matters through the online ERP system.
Contact information for the ERP team is given below.
Guidelines for students
1. Keep the ERP user ID and password confidential, and do not share it with anyone;
2. Students are suggested to change their password before every enrollment;
3. At the time of enrollment, it is advised that students only use one portal connection at a time.
Reach out to the following ERP Help Desk team members for your queries and (or) issues 
related to ERP and LMS: 
Mr. Usman Khurshid
Ext: 2106
Email: ukhursheed@iba.edu.pk
Mr. Shujjat Raza
Ext: 1152
Email: shujjatraza@iba.edu.pk
Mr. Zeeshan Ali Bilal
Ext: 1135
Email: zabilal@iba.edu.pk
Keep the following email in CC: ERP_helpdesk@iba.edu.pk
PeopleSoft Student Financials
Contact information for the PeopleSoft Student Financials team is given below:
Ms. Mehwish Khatri
Email: mkhatri@iba.edu.pk 
Ext: 1115
Mr. Usman Khurshid
Ext: 2106
Email: ukhursheed@iba.edu.pk50
 51
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24Learning Management System (SAKAI-LMS)
Learning Management System (LMS) enables instructors and students to share knowledge, 
collaborate, and engage in a wide spectrum of technology-enabled learning experiences, 
supported by an intuitive, modern user interface. LMS has been designed to help instructors, 
researchers, and students to create course websites for collaboration. These course websites 
include the following prominent features:
1. Uploading course outlines/syllabus.
2. Creating important announcements to notify students.
3. Creating and submitting assignments.
4. Conducting online tests and quizzes.
5. Resources folder to share course contents.
6. Turnitin integration to check assignment plagiarism, etc.
Contact information for the LMS team is given below:
Mr. Azhar Hussain Larik
Email: ahlarik@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 1112 
Mr. Zeeshan Ali Bilal
Email: zabilal@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 1135
Useful online application systems for students
l	IBA Job Portal is a one-stop solution for career development for students and alumni. The 
portal enables students/alumni to develop their career profiles, stay abreast of multiple career 
opportunities, and apply for jobs and internships at national and multinational companies. The 
profile can be created at https://jobportal.iba.edu.pk/
l	Students Facilitation System being used by students to submit various types of requests 
(attendance discrepancy, makeup exam, recommendation letter, exchange program 
applications, etc.) using online forms. https://webapps.iba.edu.pk/sfs/home/login
l	Clinic Management System facilitates the booking of an online appointment for counseling 
and other related matters. https://ibaapps.iba.edu.pk/clinic/ 
l	IBA events calendar to register and view events and happenings at the Institute.                   
https://webapps.iba.edu.pk/events/
l	TA/RA Management System to upload working hours and get paid for them.                           
https://ibaapps.iba.edu.pk/tams/  and https://ibaapps.iba.edu.pk/mstms/ 
l	Online payment/donation application enables students to pay or donate to IBA using their 
bank cards. https://onlinepayment.iba.edu.pk/ and https://donate.iba.edu.pk/
l	Fee voucher application to generate and print fee voucher from one’s home using this online 
facility. https://ibaapps.iba.edu.pk/fee_voucher/ 
l	Societies Election System to register for various societies and vote for the preferred candidates.
l	TA Allocation System  to apply for TA-ship and get selected through a standard selection 
procedure. https://webapps.iba.edu.pk/tas/l	Online degree/transcript system to make an online request to issue student degrees and 
transcripts. https://ibaapps.iba.edu.pk/tnd 
l	IBA mobile application to get instant notifications and alerts about news and various events 
held at the IBA Karachi. The app is available for both Android and iOS users.
l	Alumni Management System  serves as a complete portal to register and manage the IBA 
alumni along with an online election module for the selection of alumni representative on the 
Board of Governors. https://alumni.iba.edu.pk/
Contact information for the web and mobile application team is given below:
Mr. Azhar Hussain Larik
Email: ahlarik@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 1112
Mr. M. Sharif Jamali
Email: mjamali@iba.edu.pk
Ext: 1114
Video conferencing (VC)
The IBA Karachi has two fully-equipped video conference rooms (one at each campus) with 
multiple monitors and digital video camera, linking IBA directly to anywhere in the world. The 
facility allows ease in communication.
In addition, mobile VC equipment is also available at both campuses which can be moved to any 
location for video conference.
Contact information for VC rooms and mobile VC at both the campuses is as follows:
Main Campus City Campus 
Mr. Zeeshan Khan Mr. Asif Ali
Email: zkhan@iba.edu.pk  Email: asifali@iba.edu.pk 
Cell: 0333-3938864, Ext: 2104  Cell: 0321-8230364, Ext: 1119
52
 53
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 Career
 Development Center
The Career Development Center (CDC) at the IBA Karachi is dedicated to facilitating students, 
graduating classes and alumni in several ways. It helps in self-evaluation and skills 
development, creating awareness about career opportunities, assisting in career development 
and job search, increasing the employability opportunities of IBA’s graduating students, and 
developing strong linkages between employers and the IBA graduates. It also supports the IBA 
alumni in their career progression. To know more about the Center and its offered services, 
please visit: https://cdc.iba.edu.pk/
Get in touch with the team at cdc@iba.edu.pk and/or teamcdc@iba.edu.pk
 IBA
 Hostels
The IBA Karachi provides hostel facility to its full-time, regular students from outside Karachi. 
Two hostels, one each for female and male students, are located within the premises of the 
University of Karachi, whereas the other girls’ hostel is situated at the City Campus. The hostels 
are spread over an area of 2.5 acres, surrounded by lush green lawns, trees, and gardens. The 
design of the hostels amalgamates the needs of modern urban sustainable living, while vast 
and open corridors enable a pleasant and properly ventilated living space.
The IBA hostel life is a testimony to IBA’s diversity and inclusivity. Residents come from all over 
Pakistan, as well as from other countries and bring with them different cultural, economic, 
social, and religious backgrounds to share a similar bond, which is their association with the 
prestigious institution and with each other. The IBA hostels provide an atmosphere where 
students can learn and develop life-long associations while enjoying a comfortable setting.
For more details regarding hostel rules and regulations, and accommodation,
please visit: https://www.iba.edu.pk/student-residences
 Transport
 Services
The IBA Karachi provides transport facility for students, faculty and staff. For more details, 
please visit: https://www.iba.edu.pk/transport
 Fee and
 Dues
1. Procedure for payment of tuition fee & university dues
 a) Tuition fee will be announced around the commencement of the semester.
 b) Fee vouchers will be made available to students through the ERP.
 c) Students are liable to make payments for the fee due, by the deadline as mentioned on 
the voucher and announced through notice.
 d) Payments can be made in one of the following modes:
 s Direct deposit through any Faysal/Meezan Bank Branch in Pakistan, using fee 
vouchers generated from ERP.
 s Online payment through the IBA website: https://onlinepayment.iba.edu.pk/
 s Payment through internet banking. For FAQs, please visit here:
  https://www.iba.edu.pk/faqs-internet-banking
Note: Your payments made through the above method will take 1-2 working days for bank confirmation.
If any student does not pay all their dues till the completion of the program, they will not be issued 
a provisional transcript, official transcript or degree, till the time they clear all their dues.
2. Determination of student fee
 a) The Institute will fix or specify means by which the tuition fee will be calculated or 
ascertained, for any course of study or training at the Institute.
 b) The Institute must ensure that no student will be or continue to be enrolled in a course of 
study or training at the Institute unless they have paid:
 s The tuition fee fixed or calculated or ascertained;
 s All other charges prescribed by the Institute.
 c) The Board of Governors (BOG) of the Institute shall approve the fee for programs of study to 
be offered to students in any given academic year, as recommended by the management of 
the IBA Karachi. The recommendation for setting of fee shall be through the annual budget 
of the Institute.
 d) In the annual budget of every financial year, the Finance department shall present proposals 
for increment in the existing student fee to the BOG. On the approval of the proposal, fee 
shall be increased and set to the new level.
3. Calculation of fee
 a) The Institute will charge the fee on credit hours basis.
 b) Fee will be charged to all students as per the total credit hours opted in a semester.
 c) Other approved fee charges which are not based upon the credit hours will be added to 
the fee challan as applicable.54
 55
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-24 STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-244. Procedures regarding fee refund
 a) Any request by a student to amend their program of study or withdrawal from a program 
or paper must be made in writing/email.
 b) The Institute reserves the right to request additional supporting information before any 
course amendment request is considered.
 c) Where the student’s account has a credit balance which is clearly attributable to an 
overpayment of fee, any such balance will be refunded in full after the verification and 
approval from the relevant departments based on the specific case, on the request of the 
student.
 d) Refund of tuition fee is applicable to all students i.e. regular, evening and EMBA programs.
 e) Fee will be refunded in the following cases:
Fee Refund Cases
S.No. Scenarios Policy/Timeline
1Percentage of tuition fee
• Full (100%) fee refund
• Half (50%) fee refund
• No (0%) fee refundFull (100%) of the tuition fee will be refunded 
up to the seventh day the classes convene.
Half (50%) of the tuition fee will be refunded 
from the eighth to the 15th day the classes 
convene.
No fee (0%) will be refunded from the 16th 
day the classes convene.
2IBA cannot provide the academic study 
offered100% of the tuition fee will be refunded.
3 Change of classesWhen a student elects to change a class, 
there will generally be no change in the 
tuition fee and therefore additional tuition 
fee, refunds and administration charges do 
not normally apply.
4 Credit balanceIn the case of overpayment of levied charges, 
students may request a refund for the 
balance.
5IBA withdraws an offer of admission from a 
student100% of the tuition fee will be refunded if the 
student does not meet the criteria of 
provisional admission. No tuition fee will be 
refunded if it is found that the student has 
provided incomplete or inaccurate  
information in support of their application 
for admission, any application for credit or 
recognition of prior learning or their 
enrollment.6IBA excludes the student due to poor 
academic performanceIf the student does not meet the minimum 
GPA (2.2 criteria) 100% of the tuition fee will 
be refunded for any future semester paid for 
in advance and not yet commenced, but no 
refund for the semester in which the 
student was excluded.
7IBA suspends or expels the student due to 
academic misconduct100% of the tuition fee will be refunded for 
any future semester paid in advance and 
not yet commenced, but no refund for the 
semester in which the student was 
suspended or expelled.
8 Semester gapTuition fee paid in advance will be adjusted 
for the upcoming semesters, if the student 
is allowed a semester gap by the IBA 
administration.
9 Extraordinary circumstances100% of the student tuition fee will be 
refunded if the student suffers from 
extraordinary circumstances (i.e. death or 
accident which causes permanent  
disability).
56
STUDENT HANDBOOK 2023-241.  Exception
Under any circumstances admission fee will NOT be refunded and transferred.
 1.1 Exclusion
  Cash, cheque and pay order will not be accepted from the students at the IBA Finance 
department.
 a) One-time charge
  One-time charge such as admission fee and orientation course fee* are also applicable in 
addition to the tuition fee. These charges must be paid at the time of admission at the IBA 
Karachi.
*Orientation Course Fee will be applied to MBA Morning/Evening candidates only.
Important notes
Students will not be enrolled for the next semester if fee for the previous semester(s) is not paid 
in full (i.e. no enrollment in the next semester).
If a student is unable to pay balance of his/her dues till the completion of courses, the student 
will not be issued provisional transcript, original transcript and degree till the time all the dues 
have been cleared.
Contact Details
Finance department Financial aid office Student societies
Muhammad Danish                                        
Manager Finance           
   IBA Main Campus                                             
Tel: 021-38104700-01 
Ext: 2306Financial Aid Staff  
IBA Main Campus                  
Tel: 021-38104700-01                  
Ext: 2310 & 1301Arshad Hussain                 
Senior Executive Finance           
IBA Main Campus             
Tel: 021-38104700-01
 Ext: 1803
 Service
 Units
Several service units work tirelessly to enhance the overall experience of the students in terms of 
curricular, co-curricular, and extra-curricular activities. Contact details of the team members for 
each unit can be accessed at: https://www.iba.edu.pk/service-units :   IBAKHIPK
 :  ibakarachi
 :   Institute of Business Administration
 :   ibakhipk
 :   ibakarachi_official
Main Campus
University Enclave, University Road, Karachi - 75270
Phone: 92-21-38104700 I Fax: 92-21-99261508
City Campus
Plot No. 68 & 88 Garden/Kayani Shaheed Road,  Karachi - 74400
Phone: 92-21-38104701 I Fax: 92-21-38103008Disclaimer: The IBA management reserves the 
right to use pictures of students taken during 
campus events for its various publications and 
social media. These pictures, however, will not 
be used for any commercial purpose. 